[[!meta title="Modifying the boot options using the Boot Loader"]]

The Boot Loader is the first screen that appears
when Tails starts.

You can use the Boot Loader to modify the *boot options*. Boot options are
special parameters used to troubleshoot or work around hardware support problems.
For example, our [[list of known issues with graphics cards|support/known_issues/graphics]]
documents boot options for different graphics cards.

Depending on the computer, the Boot Loader might be either *GRUB* or
*SYSLINUX*.

In both *GRUB* and *SYSLINUX*, the keyboard layout of the Boot Menu is set to
English (US).

[[!img english_us_keyboard.png alt=""]]

[[!toc levels=1]]

<a id="syslinux"></a>

Using *SYSLINUX*
================

This is what *SYSLINUX* looks like:

[[!img install/inc/screenshots/syslinux.png class="screenshot" alt="Black screen ('SYSLINUX') with Tails
logo and 2 options: 'Tails' and 'Tails (Troubleshooting Mode)'."]]

<div class="note">

<p>If your Boot Loader looks different, refer to our instructions below on
modifying the boot options [[using GRUB|boot_options#grub]].</p>

</div>

To modify the boot options in *SYSLINUX*:

<!-- Keep in sync with install/inc/steps/restart_first_time.inline.mdwn. -->

1. Press **Tab** when *SYSLINUX* appears.

   A command line with a list
   of boot options appears at the bottom of the screen.

   [[!img syslinux-with-options.png class="screenshot" alt="SYSLINUX with
   a list of options starting with '/live/vmlinuz' at the bottom"]]

1. Modify the boot options as needed.

   To add a boot option, press **Space** and type the boot option that you
   want to add.

   If you want to add more than one boot option, type them one after the
   other and separate them with a **Space**.

1. Press **Enter** to start Tails.

<a id="grub"></a>

Using *GRUB*
============

This is what *GRUB* looks like:

[[!img install/inc/screenshots/grub.png class="screenshot" alt="Black screen ('GNU GRUB') with Tails
logo and 3 options: 'Tails' and 'Tails (Troubleshooting Mode)' and 'Tails (External Hard Disk)'."]]

<div class="note">

<p>If your Boot Loader looks different, refer to our instructions on
modifying the boot options [[using SYSLINUX|boot_options#syslinux]] above.</p>

</div>

To modify the boot options in *GRUB*:

<!-- Keep in sync with install/inc/steps/restart_first_time.inline.mdwn. -->

1. Press **e** when GRUB appears.

   A new screen appears with more options.

   [[!img grub-with-options.png class="screenshot" alt="GRUB with a list of
   options starting with 'setparams Tails'"]]

1. Modify the boot options as needed.

   To add a boot option, navigate with the arrows of the keyboard to the end of the line that
   starts with `linux`.
   Type the boot option that you want to add. The line is most likely
   wrapped and displayed on several lines but it is a single configuration line.

   If you want to add more than one boot option, type them one after the
   other and separate them with a **Space**.

1. Press **Ctrl+X**, **F10**, or **Fn+F10** to start Tails.

Modify the boot options on the USB stick
========================================

To use modified boot options automatically when restarting Tails, you can save
these changes to your Tails USB stick.

<div class="bug">

<p>These modifications are deleted each time you upgrade Tails. ([[!tails_ticket 18268]])</p>

</div>

To do so:

1. When starting Tails, [[set up an administration password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

1. Open a *Console*.

1. Execute to following command to allow modifying the content of the Tails
   partition on the USB stick.

   <p class="command">sudo mount -o remount,rw /usr/lib/live/mount/medium/</p>

1. Execute the following command to edit the configuration of the Boot Loader.

   - If your computer uses *SYSLINUX*:

     <p class="command">gnome-text-editor admin:/usr/lib/live/mount/medium/syslinux/live64.cfg</p>

     The section `label live` corresponds to the default boot options.

     The section `label livefailsafe` corresponds to the troubleshooting mode.

   - If your computer uses *GRUB*:

     <p class="command">gnome-text-editor admin:/usr/lib/live/mount/medium/EFI/debian/grub.cfg</p>

     The section `menuentry 'Tails 6.11'` corresponds to the default boot
     options.

     The section `menuentry 'Tails 6.11 (Troubleshooting Mode)'` corresponds to
     the troubleshoot mode.

1. Save your changes.

1. Restart to test your changes.
