[[!meta title="Protection against cold boot attacks"]]

While using a computer, all the data manipulated is written temporarily
in [[!wikipedia Random-access_memory desc="RAM"]]: texts, saved files,
but also passwords and encryption keys. The more recent the activity,
the more likely it is for the data to still be in RAM.

After a computer is powered off, the data in RAM disappears rapidly, but
it can remain in RAM up to several minutes after shutdown. An attacker
having access to a computer before the data in RAM disappears completely could
recover important data from your session.

This can be achieved using a technique called
[[!wikipedia cold boot attack]]. To prevent such attacks, the data in RAM is
overwritten by random data when you shut down Tails.

Moreover, an attacker having physical access to the computer *while
Tails is running* can recover data from RAM as well. To avoid that,
learn the different methods to [[shutdown
Tails|doc/first_steps/shutdown]] rapidly.

<div class="attack">

<p>As far as we know, cold boot attacks are not a common procedure for
data recovery.</p>

<p>In a <a
href="https://www.forensicfocus.com/stable/wp-content/uploads/2011/08/cold_boot_attack_for_forensiscs1.pdf">research
report from 2011</a>, Defense Research and Development Canada concluded that
cold boot attacks can be useful in some cases to acquire data in memory but are
not a panacea and have many drawbacks dictated by the laws of physics, which
cannot be overcome by the technique. The authors recommend to only use cold
boot attacks as a last resort when all other avenues have been exhausted.</p>

</div>

<div class="next">

<p>See how we implement this [[memory
erasure|contribute/design/memory_erasure]], for example, if you want to
implement this feature outside of Tails.</p>

</div>
