[[!meta title="Accessing the internal hard disk"]]

<div class="caution">

<p>Accessing internal disks of the computer has security implications:

<ul>
  <li>You can leave traces of your Tails activities on the hard disks.</li>
  <li>If Tails is compromised, a malware could install itself on your usual operating system.</li>
  <li>If an application in Tails is compromised, it could access private data on your disks and use it to deanonymize you.</li>
</ul>

</p>

</div>

To access internal hard disks:

1. When starting Tails, [[set up an administration
   password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Utilities&nbsp;▸ Disks** to open the *Disks* utility.

1. In the left pane of the *Disks* utility, select the storage device that
   corresponds to your internal hard disk.

   Verify its brand and size.

1. In the right pane is displayed a schema of the partitions on your internal
   hard disk.

1. Select the partition of your internal hard disk that you want to access.

1. In the **Authentication Required** dialog, enter your administration
   password.

1. Select the [[!img lib/media-playback-start.png alt="Mount selected partition"
   class="symbolic" link="no"]] button to mount the partition.

1. Select the */media/amnesia/* link to open the volume in the *Files*
   browser.

<div class="caution">

<p>If your usual operating system is in
hibernation, accessing it might corrupt your file system. Only access your disk
if your system was shut down entirely.</p>

</div>

<div class="note">

<p>If you have a GNU/Linux system on your disks, you can only access
files owned by the first user (with UID 1000) on that system.</p>

<p>In all cases, you might encounter permissions problems. To bypass
permission limitations, you can run the <i>Files</i> browser
with administration rights.</p>

</div>
