[[!meta title="Accessing resources on the local network"]]

The term "local network" refers to the set of computers and devices
that can be reached directly from your computer without going through
the Internet.

For example, your home router, your network printer, or
the intranet of your company are usually on your
local network, also called LAN for Local Area Network. In technical
terms, this refers to the set of IP addresses defined in
[RFC1918](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1918), like IP addresses that start
with `192.168`.

[[!toc]]

Security considerations
=======================

Accessing resources on the local network can be useful in the context of
Tails, for example to exchange documents with someone on the same local
network without going through the Internet.

But an application that can connect to both resources on the
Internet (going through Tor) and resources on the local network (without going
through Tor) can deanonymize you.

This page describes some of the security measures built into Tails to
protect from such attacks and explains how to access some types of
resources on the local network.

<div class="caution">

<p>Connections made to the local network are not anonymous and do not go
through Tor.</p>

</div>

<a id="browser"></a>

Browsing web pages on the local network
=======================================

It is impossible to access web pages on the local network using *Tor Browser*.
This prevents websites on the Internet from deanonymizing you
using the content of other web pages that might be specific to your local
network and reveal where you are.

To access web pages on the local network, use the
[[*Unsafe Browser*|anonymous_internet/unsafe_browser]] instead.

<a id="http"></a>

Downloading files from web pages on the local network
=====================================================

To download files from web pages on the local network, you can use the
`curl` command instead. For example, to download a document available on
the local network at *http://192.168.1.40/document.pdf*
execute the following command:

    curl http://192.168.1.40/document.pdf
