[[!meta title="Running Tails in a virtual machine"]]

[[!toc levels=2]]

It is sometimes convenient to be able to run Tails without having to
restart your computer every time. This is possible using
[[!wikipedia Virtual_machine desc="virtual machines"]].

With virtual machines, it is possible to run Tails inside a *host*
operating system. A virtual machine
emulates a real computer and its operating system, called a *guest*, which
appears in a window on the *host* operating system.

<div class="bug">

<p>Because, <i>VirtualBox</i> works pretty badly with Tails, we stopped
advertising solutions for using virtual machines in Windows or macOS.</p>

<p>We only present below 2 solutions for Linux: <i>GNOME Boxes</i> and
<i>virt-manager</i>.</p>

</div>

When running Tails in a virtual machine, you can use most features of
Tails from your usual operating system, and you can use both Tails and your usual operating system in parallel,
without the need to restart the computer.

<div class="note">

<p>We do not currently provide a solution for running a virtual machine
inside a Tails host.</p>

</div>

This is how Tails looks when run in a virtual machine on a Debian host.

[[!img tails-in-vm.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

<a id="security"></a>

Security considerations
=======================

<div class="caution">

<p>Running Tails inside a virtual machine has various security
implications. Depending on the host operating system and your security
needs, running Tails in a virtual machine might be dangerous.</p>

</div>

<a id="trustworthy"></a>

  - Both the host operating system and the [[virtualization
    software|virtualization#software]] are able to monitor what you are
    doing in Tails.

    If the host operating system is compromised with a software
    keylogger or other malware, then it can break the security built into
    Tails.

    <div class="caution">
    
    <p>Only run Tails in a virtual machine if both the host operating
    system and the virtualization software are trustworthy.</p>
    
    </div>

    <div class="attack">

    <p>For example, when using virtual machines in Windows, <a
    href="https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/retrace-your-steps-with-recall-aa03f8a0-a78b-4b3e-b0a1-2eb8ac48701c"><i>Microsoft
    Recall</i></a> might be taking regular screenshots of your activity.</p>

    </div>

<a id="traces"></a>

  - Traces of your Tails session are likely to be left on the local hard
    disk. For example, host operating systems usually use swapping (or *paging*) which
    copies part of the RAM to the hard disk.

    <div class="caution">
    
    <p>Only run Tails in a virtual machine if leaving traces on the hard disk
    is not a concern for you.</p>
    
    </div>

This is why Tails warns you when it is running inside a virtual machine.

<div class="note">

<p>The Tails virtual machine does not modify the behavior of the host
operating system and the network traffic of the host is not anonymized. The MAC
address of the computer is not modified by the [[MAC address
anonymization|first_steps/welcome_screen/mac_spoofing]] feature of Tails
when run in a virtual machine.</p>

</div>

<a id="software"></a>

Virtualization solutions
========================

To run Tails inside a virtual machine, you need to have
virtualization software installed on the host operating system.
Different virtualization software exists for Linux, Windows, and macOS.
Unfortunately, we only know of virtualization solutions for Linux that work
well with Tails.

<div class="note">

<p>We only mention Free Software, because we believe that it is a necessary
condition to be trustworthy. Proprietary virtualization software exist, such as
<i>VMWare</i>, but is not listed here on purpose.</p>

</div>

  - ***GNOME Boxes*** is only available on
    Linux. It has a simpler user
    interface than *virt-manager* but does not allow to use a Persistent Storage.

    See [[running Tails in *GNOME Boxes*|boxes]].

  - ***virt-manager*** is only available on
    Linux. It has a more
    complex user interface than *GNOME Boxes* but allows to use a Persistent Storage, either
    by:

    - Starting Tails from a USB stick.
    - Creating a virtual USB storage volume saved as a single file on the host
      operating system.

    See [[running Tails in *virt-manager*|virt-manager]].
