[[!meta title="Converting dangerous documents to safe PDFs using Dangerzone"]]
[[!meta date="Tue, 06 Aug 2024 18:00:00 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

Today, we added documentation on our website to [[install *Dangerzone* in
Tails|doc/persistent_storage/additional_software/dangerzone]].

When you receive untrusted documents, for example, email attachments,
*[Dangerzone](https://dangerzone.rocks/)* allows you to convert them into safe
PDFs before opening.

*Dangerzone* is particularly useful for journalists who might receive dangerous
documents from anonymous sources or download them from the Internet.

*Dangerzone* is an essential tool and is built by great people. It was first
written by [Micah Lee](https://micahflee.com/about/) to protect investigative
journalists while working at [The Intercept](https://theintercept.com/).
*Dangerzone* is now maintained by [Freedom of the Press
Foundation](https://freedom.press), a nonprofit that protects public-interest
journalism. Edward Snowden and Laura Poitras are on its Board of Directors.

It's totally the kind of software that aligns with [[our
mission|contribute/mission]]. The only reason why we are not including
*Dangerzone* in Tails by default is because *Dangerzone* is too big and not
available in Debian.

So, we collaborated with Alex Pyrgiotis from Freedom of the Press Foundation to
make it as easy as possible to install *Dangerzone* in Tails as [[Additional
Software|doc/persistent_storage/additional_software]]. The setup requires using
the command line, but, after that, *Dangerzone* will install automatically
every time you start Tails.

*Dangerzone* will allow more investigative journalists to use the safe
environment that Tails provides when manipulating sensitive documents.

It's also the first time that we recommend installing a 3rd party package that
is not available in Debian. We know that a lot of software that would be useful
for our users is not readily available in Debian. If this first experiment is
successful, we might document more such packages.
