[[!meta title="Make the gift of privacy!"]]
[[!meta date="Sat, 28 Oct 2023 23:00:00 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

With malicious actors’ intrusions into human rights growing in sophistication
and scale, Tails offers hope for those seeking refuge in a more secure digital
environment. We stand on the precipice of a future where digital privacy should
be a fundamental right, not a luxury.

Since we started in 2008, millions of people around the world have
used Tails to be more secure, autonomous, and anonymous in their digital lives.

We have come so far thanks to you, and need your support to continue to do what
we do best: deliver the world's most privacy-preserving operating system!

Your donations a lion's share of our income. But, this share
has reduced in the last couple of years. Globally, philanthropic giving has
fallen, in what is yet another symptom of the challenging political and
economic conditions we find ourselves in. But this hasn’t tempered our
ambitions. Despite these challenges, Tails has gotten bigger and better over
the past year. We have spent more time improving Tails this year than any
previous year. But to achieve this, we have relied a bit more on support from
large, institutional donors. 

While we are grateful for the support and generosity of our "large" donors, we
want to keep our reliance on them to a minimum. We are betting on having
diversified income streams as our insurance from economic volatility and
assurance of growing Tails sustainably and with complete decisional autonomy.
Although, this means that we rely on you even more. And hence this fundraiser!

Our goal is clear: to make Tails even more useful for vulnerable people in
high-risk environments. And we want to do this while remaining as autonomous as
our users are.

The proceeds from this fundraiser will drive initiatives that will make Tails
even more usable and secure. We want to add new, big features to Tails, enhance
user experience with even more usability tests, and increase Tails’ use in more
geographies around the world.

Every donation, no matter how small, makes a difference. Please donate today
and help us keep Tails alive and well in 2024 and beyond! Here are 5 ways you
can get involved:

1. <b>By making a recurring donation.</b> Recurring donations are
   the best insurance for Tails' mission. These help us weather economic
   uncertainties and plan our work sustainably.

2. <b>With a one-time gift.</b> If you can't set-up a recurring donation, you
   can make a one-time donation. Donate via PayPal, bank transfers,
   mail in your checks, or just send us good, old cash. Here's a pro-tip:
   donations of over $1&#8239;000 entitle you to some neat sponsorship
   benefits.

3. <b>Through cryptocurrency.</b> We accept crypto donations in
   Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Monero.

4. <b>Gift matching.</b> If your employer runs gift-matching programmes,
   consider looking up <b>Riseup Labs</b> and donate to <b>Tails via Riseup
   Labs</b>. Riseup Labs is our fiscal sponsor in the United States of America.

5. <b>Spread the word.</b> And finally, please share this fundraiser with your
   network, friends, and colleagues. Help us amplify our impact by reaching a
   wider audience!

Thank you for being part of this journey and a toast to our future adventures
together! Oh, and in case you have somehow managed to skip over all the links
to our donations page so far, here it is: <https://tails.net/donate/>.
