[[!meta title="Replacing balenaEtcher with Rufus as installer for Windows"]]
[[!meta date="Wed, 19 Feb 2025 00:00:00 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

We replaced *balenaEtcher* with *Rufus* in our [[installation instructions for
Windows|install/windows]] to solve privacy concerns with *balenaEtcher*.

Since [[January 2019|report_2019_01]], we had been recommending
[*balenaEtcher*](https://etcher.balena.io/) to install Tails from Windows and
macOS. We loved the simplicity of *balenaEtcher*, which was really easier to
use and worked on macOS as well.

Shortly after, *balenaEtcher* started displaying ads. Although we didn't like
that, we initially didn't view it as a significant privacy risk and had no
better alternative at the time.

However, in 2024, the situation changed: *balenaEtcher* started
sharing the file name of the image and the model of the USB stick with the
Balena company and possibly with third parties. While we have not experienced
or heard of any attacks against Tails users stemming from this change, we
believe it introduces potential for abuse. To eliminate that risk altogether,
we started looking again for alternatives.

After evaluating [[!tails_ticket 20423 desc="7 other tools"]], we finally chose
[*Rufus*](https://rufus.ie/). We had [[!tails_ticket 7034 desc="tested *Rufus*
many years ago"]], even before recommending *balenaEtcher*, but it was much
harder to use and modified the Tails image in ways that were risky.

Congratulations to Akeo Consulting, the company behind *Rufus*, for really
improving the usability and reliability of their tool!

We have not yet replaced *balenaEtcher* in our installation instructions for
macOS because *Rufus* doesn't work on macOS. Also, as Tails doesn't work on
Apple M1 and M2 processors, people who install Tails from macOS represent less
than 10% of installations nowadays.

Still, we recommend [[2 alternatives for macOS|/install/mac#etcher]]:
installing Tails using `dd` on the command line or using [*Raspberry Pi
Imager*](https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/).
