[[!meta title="Test Tails 6.0~rc1"]]
[[!meta date="Wed, 02 Feb 2024 13:00:00 -0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]

[[!tag announce]]

We are very excited to present you a release candidate of the upcoming Tails
6.0.

We plan to release Tails 6.0 officially on February 27. You can help us by
testing already a release candidate of Tails 6.0 before February 18.

Tails 6.0 will be the first version of Tails based on Debian 12 (Bookworm) and
GNOME 43. It will bring new versions of most of the software included in Tails
as well as several important security and usability improvements.

We will provide security upgrades for Tails 6.0~rc1 like we do for
regular versions of Tails.

[[!toc levels=2]]

<h1 id="features">New features</h1>

## Mount external devices automatically

When you plug in an external storage device, a USB stick or an external hard
disk, Tails 6.0~rc1 mounts it automatically. If the storage device contains an
encrypted partition, Tails 6.0~rc1 offers you to unlock the encryption
automatically.

[[!img unlock.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt="Authentication Required. A
passphrase is needed to access encrypted data."]]

## Protection against malicious USB devices

If an attacker manages to plug a [[!wikipedia BadUSB desc="malicious USB
device"]] in your computer, they could run software that breaks the security
built in Tails without your knowledge.

To protect from such attacks while you are away from your computer, Tails
6.0~rc1 ignores any USB device that is plugged in while your screen is locked.

You can only use new USB devices if they are plugged in while the screen is
unlocked.

[[!img usbguard.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt="Notification: Reconnect
USB device. New device has been detected while you were away. Please disconnect
and reconnect the device to start using it."]]

## Dark Mode and Night Light

From the system menu of Tails 6.0~rc1, you can now switch between:

- The default *light* mode with colder colors and more brightness

  [[!img doc/first_steps/desktop/light.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

- A *dark* mode
  
  [[!img doc/first_steps/desktop/dark.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

- A *night light* mode with warmer colors and less brightness

  [[!img doc/first_steps/desktop/night.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

- A combination of both the *dark* mode and *night light* mode

  [[!img doc/first_steps/desktop/dark_night.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

## Easier screenshots and screencasts

GNOME 43 introduces a new [[!img lib/camera-photo.png alt="Take Screenshot"
class="symbolic" link="no"]] shortcut in the system menu that makes it easier
to take a screenshot or record a screencast.

[[!img doc/sensitive_documents/screenshot_and_screencast/camera.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

## Easier Gmail in Thunderbird

Thanks to changes in both Thunderbird and Gmail, it's much easier to configure
a Gmail account in Thunderbird in Tails 6.0~rc1.

- You don't have to configure anything special in your Gmail account, other
  than the usual 2-Step Verification.

- You can sign in to your Gmail account directly when configuring it in
  *Thunderbird*.

[[!img gmail.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt="Gmail: Sign in to continue
to Mozilla Thunderbird"]]

## Diceware passphrases in 5 more languages

When creating a Persistent Storage, suggested passphrases are now also
generated in Catalan, German, Italian, Portuguese, and Spanish.

Thanks to [[!tails_gitlab jawlensky]] who created the word lists for Catalan,
Italian, and Spanish for Tails, but also made them available to all users of
`diceware`.

[[!img diceware.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

## Included software

Tails 6.0~rc1 updates many of the applications included in Tails, among others:

- *Electrum* from 4.0.9 to 4.3.4

  * Improve support for the Lightning protocol and hardware wallets.

- *KeePassXC* from 2.6.2 to 2.7.4

  * Add entry tags.
  * Support dark mode.
  * Redesign history view.

- *Metadata Cleaner* from 1.0.2 to 2.4.0

  * Redesign the whole user interface.
  * Support dark mode.
  * Add support for AIFF and HEIC files.

- *OnionShare* from 2.2-3 to 2.6-5

  * Redesign the whole user interface.
  * Allow creating chat rooms.
  * Allow hosting static websites.

- *Text Editor* from `gedit` to `gnome-text-editor`

  * Support dark mode.

- *Inkscape* from 1.0.2 to 1.2.2

- *Audacity* from 2.4.2 to 3.2.4

- *GIMP* from 2.10.22 to 2.10.34

- *Kleopatra* from 4:20.08 to 4:22.12

<!--

Maybe mention as well in the release notes for 6.0:

- Simplified Wi-Fi
- Activities (#19655)
- Lock Screen and user icon

-->

## Removed features

- Remove the item **Remove metadata** from the shortcut menu of the *Files*
  browser.

  The developers of MAT2, the metadata removal library used by *Metadata
  Cleaner* are not providing this option anymore.

- Remove the item **Wipe** and **Wipe available disk space** from the shortcut
  menu of the *Files* browser.

  Secure deletion is not reliable enough on USB sticks and SSDs for us to keep
  advertising this feature. We are still discussing which alternatives to
  explain in our documentation on [[secure
  deletion|doc/encryption_and_privacy/secure_deletion]]. ([[!tails_ticket 19121]])

- Remove *GtkHash*

  You can still install *GtkHash* as [[Additional
  Software|doc/persistent_storage/additional_software]].

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Fix several issues with special characters and non-Latin scripts in the
  screen keyboard. ([[!tails_ticket 18076]])

# Changelog

For more details about what has changed in Tails 6.0~rc1, read our
changelog.

# Known issues

- Tails 6.0~rc1 is not reliably reproducible ([[!tails_ticket 20165]], [[!tails_ticket 20166]]).

- *OnionShare* 2.6 has several issues in Tails and Debian 12 (Bookworm) in
  general that have security implications:

  * OnionShare stays open in the background and fails to reopen. ([[!tails_ticket 20135]])

  * OnionShare crashes when stopping and restarting file shares in OnionShare. ([[!tails_ticket 20140]])

  Despite the very interesting new features in *OnionShare* 2.6, we are
  considering keeping *OnionShare* 2.2 in Tails 6.0 because of these issues.

- Mounting external devices automatically interferes badly with some other
  features:

  * The *Back Up Persistent Storage* utility ([[!tails_ticket 20143]])

  * *Tails Cloner* ([[!tails_ticket 20154]])

- The pointer doesn't change into a spinner anymore in some cases when
  launching applications. ([[!tails_ticket 19920]])

# Send us feedback

Keep in mind that this is a test image. We tested that it is not broken in
obvious ways, but it might still contain undiscovered issues.

Please, report any new problem before February 18 to either:

- <tails-testers@boum.org> (public mailing list)

- <support@tails.net> (private email)

# Get Tails 6.0~rc1

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

Automatic upgrades are not available to 6.0~rc1.

You have to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade#manual]].

You will be able to automatically upgrade from 6.0~rc1 to 6.0 when it
is released.

## To download 6.0~rc1

### Direct download

  - For USB sticks (USB image)
    (OpenPGP signature)

  - For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)
    (OpenPGP signature)

### BitTorrent download

  - For USB sticks (USB image)

  - For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)

## To install Tails 6.0~rc1 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>
