[[!meta title="Test 7.0~rc1"]]
[[!meta date="Thu, 07 Aug 2025 00:00:00 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

We are very excited to present you with a release candidate of the upcoming
Tails 7.0.

We plan to release Tails 7.0 officially on October 16. You can help us by
testing this release candidate already.

Tails 7.0 will be the first version of Tails based on Debian 13 (Trixie) and
GNOME 48. It will bring new versions of many applications included in Tails.

We have tested 7.0~rc1 with the same extensive
[[automatic|contribute/release_process/test/automated_tests]] and
[[manual|contribute/release_process/test]] test suites that we use for regular
releases. But, Tails 7.0~rc1 might still contain undiscovered issues.

We will provide automatic security upgrades for Tails 7.0~rc1, like we do for
regular versions.

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Replace [*GNOME Terminal*](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gnome-terminal)
  with [*GNOME Console*](https://apps.gnome.org/Console/). ([[!tails_ticket
  20161]])

  We broke the *Root Terminal* while working on this change.

  To open a root terminal, execute the following command in a regular *Console*.

  <p class="command">sudo -i</p>

- Replace [*GNOME Image Viewer*](https://wiki.gnome.org/Apps/EyeOfGnome) with
  [*GNOME Loupe*](https://apps.gnome.org/Loupe/) ([[!tails_ticket 20640]])

- Remove *Kleopatra* from the Favorites menu. ([[!tails_ticket 21072]])

  To start *Kleopatra* choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Accessories&nbsp;▸ Kleopatra**.

- Remove the obsolete Network Connection option from the Welcome Screen.
  ([[!tails_ticket 21074]])

## Included software

- Update the *Tor* client to 0.4.8.17.

- Update *Thunderbird* to [128.13.0esr](https://www.thunderbird.net/en-US/thunderbird/128.13.0esr/releasenotes/).

- Update the *Linux* kernel to 6.12.38.

  This improves support for newer hardware: graphics, Wi-Fi, and so on.

- Update *Electrum* from 4.3.4 to 4.5.8.

- Update *OnionShare* from 2.6.2 to 2.6.3.

- Update *KeePassXC* from 2.7.4 to 2.7.10.

- Update *Kleopatra* from 4:22.12 to 4:24.12

- Update *Inkscape* from 1.2.2 to 1.4.

- Update *GIMP* from 2.10.34 to 3.0.4.

- Update *Audacity* from 3.2.4 to 3.7.3.

- Update *Text Editor* from 43.2 to 48.3.

- Update *Document Scanner* from 42.5 to 46.0.

## Removed software

- Remove `unar`. ([[!tails_ticket 20946]])

- Remove `aircrack-ng`. ([[!tails_ticket 21044]])

- Remove `sq`. ([[!tails_ticket 21042]])

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Fix selecting the correct keyboard for certain languages. ([[!tails_ticket
  12638]])

For more details, see the list of [closed issues on the 7.0 milestone in
GitLab](https://gitlab.tails.boum.org/tails/tails/-/issues/?milestone_title=Tails_7.0&state=closed).

<h1 id="issues">Known issues</h1>

- Tails 7.0~rc1 requires 3 GB of RAM instead of 2 GB to run smoothly.
  ([[!tails_ticket 18040]])

  We estimated that less than 2% of current users will be affected.

- Tails 7.0~rc1 takes longer to start.

  We plan to fix this in the final Tails 7.0.

For more details, see the list of [issues on the 7.0 milestone in
GitLab](https://gitlab.tails.boum.org/groups/tails/-/milestones/144#tab-issues).

<h1 id="feedback">Send your feedback</h1>

Please, report any new problem to either:

- <tails-testers@boum.org> (public mailing list)

- <support@tails.net> (private email)

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 7.0~rc1</h1>

### Direct download

  - For USB sticks (USB image)

    OpenPGP signature

  - For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)

    OpenPGP signature

### BitTorrent download

  - For USB sticks (USB image)

  - For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

You can do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]] to Tails 7.0~rc1.

Automatic upgrades are not available to Tails 7.0~rc1.

## To install Tails 7.0~rc1 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>
