[[!meta title="Tails 5.22"]]
[[!meta date="Tue, 30 Jan 2024 12:34:56 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="features">New features</h1>

- In *Tor Browser*, you can now save files to more folders: Documents, Downloads,
  Music, Pictures, and Videos. You can also upload files from these folders.

- When your Persistent Storage is broken, Tails now tries to repair its
  file system when you unlock it in the Welcome Screen.

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Report the write speed after cloning a Persistent Storage from *Tails Cloner*.

- Do not try to unlock or delete a Persistent Storage on a read-only USB stick.

- Update *Tor Browser* to [13.0.9](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-1309/).

- Update *Thunderbird* to [115.7](https://www.thunderbird.net/en-US/thunderbird/115.7.0/releasenotes/).

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Stop leaking the first-level domain of visited websites in *WhisperBack* reports.
  The problem was first introduced in Tails 5.15.1 (July 2023). ([[!tails_mr 1344]])

- Make installing Tails with *Tails Cloner* more robust by fixing occasional
  errors `AttributeError: 'NoneType' object has no attribute 'props'`.
  Thanks to Ben Westgate! ([[!tails_mr 1312]])

- Fix saving the Additional Software configuration when creating
  a Persistent Storage. ([[!tails_mr 1350]])

- Fix help link when resizing the system partition fails the first time
  Tails is started. ([[!tails_mr 1341]])

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 5.22</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 5.0 or later to 5.22.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 5.22 directly:

- [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]

- [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
