[[!meta title="Tails 5.21"]]
[[!meta date="Fri, 22 Dec 2023 12:00:00 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Help troubleshoot when resizing the system partition fails the first time
  Tails is started.

  [[!img resizing.png link="no" alt="Error message: Resizing System Partition Failed - It will be impossible to create a Persistent Storage or apply automatic upgrades."]]

- Translate the date displayed in the top navigation bar.

  [[!img clock.png link="no" alt="Clock showing date in Spanish"]]

- Update *Tor Browser* to [13.0.7](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-1307).

- Update the *Tor* client to 0.4.8.10.

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Fix *Tor Browser* crashing when clicking on the *UBlock* icon. ([[!tails_ticket 20061]])

- Make time synchronization more reliable. ([[!tails_ticket 19923]])

- [[!tails_gitlab @BenWestgate]] fixed several issues in the backup feature of *Tails Cloner*:

  * Remove message about doing a backup when no USB stick is plugged in. ([[!tails_ticket 20063]])

  * Update available options when plugging in another USB stick. ([[!tails_ticket 20042]])

  * Point to backup instructions when choosing to clone the Persistent Storage.
    ([[!tails_mr 1305]])

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 5.21</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 5.0 or later to 5.21.

  You can [[reduce the size of the download|doc/upgrade#reduce]] of future
  automatic upgrades by doing a manual upgrade to the latest version.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

  - [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]
  - [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]
  - [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]
  - [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 5.21 directly:

  - [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]
  - [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
