[[!meta title="Tails 6.1"]]
[[!meta date="Tue, 27 Mar 2024 12:34:56 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Update *Tor Browser* to [13.0.13](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-13013/).
  This includes the changes brought by [13.0.12](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-13012/).

- Update *Thunderbird* to [115.9.0](https://www.thunderbird.net/en-US/thunderbird/115.9.0/releasenotes/).

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Fix Onion Circuits. [[!tails_ticket 20233]]

- Fix Welcome Screen frequently showing a **"Welcome to Tails!" is not responding** error.
  [[!tails_ticket 20236]]

- Fix *Videos* showing an error message during playback. [[!tails_ticket 20243]]

- Fix problems with changing the passphrase of the Persistent Storage.
  [[!tails_ticket 20217]]

- *Tails Cloner* can now install and upgrade to devices with multiple mounted partitions.
  [[!tails_ticket 20149]]

- The Persistent Storage settings now display
  all enabled custom Persistent Storage features. [[!tails_ticket 19267]]

- Mitigate the RFDS Intel CPU vulnerabilities. [[!tails_ticket 20274]]

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 6.1</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 6.0 to 6.1.

  You can [[reduce the size of the download|doc/upgrade#reduce]] of future
  automatic upgrades by doing a manual upgrade to the latest version.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails 6.1 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 6.1 directly:

- [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]

- [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
