[[!meta title="Tails 5.19"]]
[[!meta date="Tue, 31 Oct 2023 12:34:56 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="features">New features</h1>

<h2>Closing a Tor circuit from <i>Onion Circuits</i></h2>

You can now close a given Tor circuit from the *Onion Circuits* interface. This
can help replace a particularly slow Tor circuit or troubleshoot issues on the
Tor network.

[[!img close_circuit.png link="no" alt=""]]

To close a Tor circuit:

1. [[Connect to the Tor network.|doc/anonymous_internet/tor]]

1. Choose [[!img lib/symbolic/tor-connected.png alt="Tor status menu"
   link="no" class="symbolic"]]&nbsp;▸ **Open Onion Circuits** in the top
   navigation bar.

1. Right-click (on Mac, click with two fingers) on the circuit that you want
   to close.

1. Choose **Close this circuit** in the shortcut menu.

   When you close a circuit that is being used by an application, your
   application gets disconnected from this destination service.

   For example, when you close a circuit while <i>Tor Browser</i> is
   downloading a file, the download fails.

1. If you connect to the same destination server again, Tor uses a different
   circuit to replace the circuit that you closed.

   For example, if you download the same file again, Tor uses a new circuit.

<h2>Addition of <span class="code">sq-keyring-linter</span></h2>

At the request of people who use [SecureDrop](https://securedrop.org/) to
provide secure whistleblowing platforms across the world, we added the
[`sq-keyring-linter`](https://tracker.debian.org/pkg/rust-sequoia-keyring-linter)
package. `sq-keyring-linter` improves the cryptographic parameters of PGP keys
stored in their airgapped machines.

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Update *Tor Browser* to [13.0.1](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-1301).

- Update the *Tor* client to 0.4.8.7.

- Update *Thunderbird* to [115.4.1](https://www.thunderbird.net/en-US/thunderbird/115.4.1/releasenotes/).

- Update the *Linux* kernel to 6.1.55.

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="issues">Known issues</h1>

None specific to this release.

See the list of [[long-standing issues|support/known_issues]].

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 5.19</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 5.0 or later to 5.19.

  You can [[reduce the size of the download|doc/upgrade#reduce]] of future
  automatic upgrades by doing a manual upgrade to the latest version.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

  - [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]
  - [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]
  - [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]
  - [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 5.19 directly:

  - [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]
  - [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
