[[!meta title="Tails 6.14.1"]]
[[!meta date="Thu, 03 Apr 2025 13:00:00 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

Today, we are releasing 6.14.1 instead of 6.14 because we discovered an
important issue while testing 6.14 on Tuesday and had to start the release
process again to fix it.

<h1 id="features">New features</h1>

## More flexible confinement of *Tor Browser*

We improved the confinement technology that we use to protect your files from
possible security vulnerabilities in *Tor Browser*.

Until now, *Tor Browser* could only save downloads to and read files from a
limited number of folders.

With Tails 6.14.1, you can safely access any folder in your *Home* folder or
Persistent Storage from *Tor Browser*.

This new integration also solves other usability and accessibility issues:

- The Large Text accessibility feature works in *Tor Browser*. ([[!tails_ticket 19266]])

- The Cursor Size accessibility feature works in *Tor Browser*. ([[!tails_ticket 19572]])

- The minimize and maximize buttons are available again in the title bar. ([[!tails_ticket 19328]])

These improvements rely on 2 security technologies: the flexibility of the new
[XDG Desktop Portals](https://flatpak.github.io/xdg-desktop-portal/) of
*Flatpak* allowed us to relax the [[AppArmor
confinement|contribute/design/application_isolation]], improving usability
without compromising on security.

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Update *Tor Browser* to [14.0.9](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-1409).

- Update the *Tor* client to 0.4.8.16.

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Fix the Welcome Screen freezing after unlocking the Persistent Storage.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20783]])

- Add a clearer border to the *Kleopatra* window when on white background.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20861]])

- Fix the error when closing the check for upgrades from *About Tails*.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20861]])

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<!--

<h1 id="issues">Known issues</h1>

Copy the known issues from the previous version if they haven't been
solved or move them to /support/known_issues if more appropriate.

-->

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 6.14.1</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 6.0 or later to 6.14.1.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails 6.14.1 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 6.14.1 directly:

- [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]

- [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
