[[!meta title="Tails 6.15"]]
[[!meta date="Thu, 01 May 2025 00:00:00 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Update *Tor Browser* to [14.5.1](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-1451).

- Update the *Linux* kernel to 6.1.135.

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Make sure Tails cannot store data in UEFI variables or ACPI tables when crashing.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20813]])

- Fix the appearance of the GRUB Boot Loader with Secure Boot.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20899]])

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="issues">Known issues</h1>

- Remove firmware for the Wi-Fi interfaces based on the BCM4301 and BCM4306
  chips. ([[!tails_ticket 20887]])

  We believe that these interfaces are only available on computers that are too
  old to start Tails. Please [[let us know|support#talk]] if your Wi-Fi stopped
  working in Tails 6.15.

- The *Unsafe Browser* appears in the window list bar with the *Tor Browser* icon.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20934]])

- Additional software may initially
  fail to install the first time you start Tails after upgrading. This should be
  fixed shortly after you connect to Tor.

- Connecting to the Internet with *USB tethering* is broken with some phones.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20940]])

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 6.15</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 6.0 or later to 6.15.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails 6.15 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 6.15 directly:

- [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]

- [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
