[[!meta title="Tails 5.20"]]
[[!meta date="Tue, 28 Nov 2023 17:00:00 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Update *Tor Browser* to [13.0.4](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-1304).

- Update *Thunderbird* to [115.5.0](https://www.thunderbird.net/en-US/thunderbird/115.5.0/releasenotes/).

- Stop downloading the *AdGuard* filter list for *uBlock Origin* in the
  language of the session.

  This prevents some advanced browser fingerprinting. ([[!tails_ticket 20022]])

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

Since many of you are still reporting issues with the new Persistent Storage,
we are releasing several improvements to the Persistent Storage and the
*WhisperBack* error reporting tool:

- Fix an error when activating the Persistent Storage. ([[!tails_ticket 20011]])

- Fix the translation of the *WhisperBack* interface. ([[!tails_ticket 20040]])

- Improve the interface of *WhisperBack* to make it easier to report the
  information we need to troubleshoot issues. ([[!tails_ticket 19351]])

  [[!img whisperback.png link="no" alt=""]]

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="issues">Known issues</h1>

None specific to this release.

See the list of [[long-standing issues|support/known_issues]].

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 5.20</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 5.0 or later to 5.20.

  You can [[reduce the size of the download|doc/upgrade#reduce]] of future
  automatic upgrades by doing a manual upgrade to the latest version.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

  - [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]
  - [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]
  - [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]
  - [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 5.20 directly:

  - [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]
  - [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
