[[!meta title="Tails 7.4"]]
[[!meta date="Thu, 15 Jan 2026 00:00:00 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="features">New feature</h1>

## Persistent language and keyboard layout

You can now save your language and keyboard layout from the *Welcome
Screen* to the USB stick. These settings will be applied automatically when
restarting Tails.

If you turn on this option, your language and keyboard layout are saved
unencrypted on the USB stick to help you type the passphrase of your Persistent
Storage more easily.

[[!img version_7.4/persistent_language.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Update *Tor Browser* to [15.0.4](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-1504/).

- Update *Thunderbird* to [140.6.0](https://www.thunderbird.net/en-US/thunderbird/140.6.0esr/releasenotes/).

- Update the *Linux* kernel to 6.12.63.

- Drop support for BitTorrent download.

  With the ongoing transition from BitTorrent v1 to v2, the BitTorrent v1 files
  that we provided until now can become a security concern. We don't think that
  updating to BitTorrent v2 is [[!tails_ticket 19275 desc="worth the extra
  migration and maintenance cost"]] for our team.

  Direct download from one of our mirrors is usually faster.

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Fix opening *.gpg* encrypted files in *Kleopatra* when double-clicking or
  selecting *Open with Kleopatra* from the shortcut menu. ([[!tails_ticket
  21281]])

- Fix the desktop crashing when unlocking *VeraCrypt* volumes with a wrong
  password. ([[!tails_ticket 21286]])

- Use 24-hour time format consistently in the top navigation bar and the lock
  screen. ([[!tails_ticket 21310]])

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 7.4</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 7.0 or later to 7.4.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails 7.4 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 7.4 directly:

- [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]

- [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
