[[!meta title="Tails 6.6"]]
[[!meta date="Tue, 13 Aug 2024 12:34:56 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Update *Tor Browser* to [13.5.2](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-1352).

- Update *Thunderbird* to [115.14.0](https://www.thunderbird.net/en-US/thunderbird/115.14.0/releasenotes/).

- Update [many](https://salsa.debian.org/kernel-team/firmware-nonfree/-/blob/master/debian/changelog?ref_type=heads) firmware packages. This improves the support for newer hardware:
  graphics, Wi-Fi, and so on.

- Detect new types of errors when resizing the system partition
  fails (the first time Tails is started) and report the following error message.

  <p class="code">
  Something went wrong when starting your Tails USB stick for the first time:<br>
  resizing the system partition failed
  <br><br>
  It will be impossible to create a Persistent Storage or apply automatic upgrades.
  </p>

  Affected users can try to install Tails again or use a different USB stick.

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

### Persistent Storage

- Increase the maximum waiting time to 4 minutes when unlocking the Persistent
  Storage before returning an error. ([[!tails_ticket 20475]])

- Made the creation of the Persistent Storage more robust after starting a
  Tails USB stick for the first time. ([[!tails_ticket 20451]])

- Prevent the Persistent Storage settings from freezing after opening a link to
  the documentation. ([[!tails_ticket 20438]])

- Prevent Additional Software from crashing when installing virtual packages.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20477]])

### Networking

- Fix connecting to the Tor network using default bridges. ([[!tails_ticket 20467]])

- Allow enabling multiple network interfaces again. ([[!tails_ticket 20128]])

### Tails Cloner

- Remove 30 seconds of waiting time when installing by cloning.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20131]])

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 6.6</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 6.0 or later to 6.6.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails 6.6 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 6.6 directly:

- [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]

- [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
