[[!meta title="Tails 6.4"]]
[[!meta date="Tue, 18 Jun 2024 12:34:56 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="features">New features</h1>

<h2>Random seed</h2>

Tails now stores a random seed on the USB stick to strengthen all cryptography.

Having a [[!wikipedia cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generator
desc="secure random number generator"]] is critical to some of the cryptography
used in Tails, for example, in the Persistent Storage, Tor, or HTTPS.

This random seed is stored [[outside of the Persistent
Storage|contribute/design/random]] so that all users can benefit from stronger
cryptography.

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Switch to using HTTPS addresses instead of an onion addresses for the Debian
  and Tails APT repositories. This makes the [[Additional
  Software|doc/persistent_storage/additional_software]] feature more reliable.

- Update *Tor Browser* to [13.0.16](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-13016).

- Update the *Tor* client to 0.4.8.12.

- Update *Thunderbird* to 115.12.0.

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Fix more issues when unlocking the Persistent Storage. ([[!tails_ticket
  20020]], [[!tails_ticket 20344]], [[!tails_ticket 19913]])

- Fix connecting to a mobile broadband network on some hardware.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20291]])

- Enable again the PDF reader of *Thunderbird* that we disabled in [[Tails
  6.3|news/version_6.3]] for security.

- Improve the error message of *Tails Cloner* when the target USB stick cannot
  be unmounted because it is being used. ([[!tails_ticket 19253]])

- Fix the homepage of *Tor Browser* when using the New Identity feature. This removes
  the error message `Tor Browser blocked your homepage from loading`.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20381]])

- Remove the redundant dialog when unlocking a VeraCrypt volume using the
  *Unlock VeraCrypt Volumes* utility. ([[!tails_ticket 20281]])

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 6.4</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 6.0 or later to 6.4.

  You can [[reduce the size of the download|doc/upgrade#reduce]] of future
  automatic upgrades by doing a manual upgrade to the latest version.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails 6.4 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 6.4 directly:

- [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]

- [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
