[[!meta title="Tails 6.8"]]
[[!meta date="Tue, 08 Oct 2024 12:34:56 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="features">New features</h1>

<h2 id="fsck">File system repair when unlocking the Persistent Storage</h2>

When the file system of the Persistent Storage has errors, Tails now offers you
to repair the file system when unlocking from the Welcome Screen.

Because not all file system errors can be safely recovered this way, we wrote
comprehensive documentation on how to [[recover data from the Persistent
Storage|doc/persistent_storage/fsck]] using complementary techniques.

[[!img doc/persistent_storage/fsck/repair.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Update *Tor Browser* to [13.5.6](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-1356).

- Improve the notification when a network interface is disabled because MAC
  address anonymization failed.

  [[!img mac.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt="Wi-Fi Disabled. MAC address anonymization failed for your Wi-Fi interface, so it is temporarily disabled. You might prefer to restart Tails and disable MAC address anonymization. Learn about MAC address anonymization."]]

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Increase the maximum waiting time to 8 minutes when unlocking the Persistent
  Storage before returning an error. ([[!tails_ticket 20475]])

- Hide shown password while unlocking Persistent Storage. ([[!tails_ticket 20498]])

- Better handle failures in when sending *WhisperBack* error messages:

  * Fix input fields when Tails is not connected to Tor. ([[!tails_ticket 19731]])
  * Fix accessibility of input fields with screen reader. ([[!tails_ticket 19903]])

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 6.8</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 6.0 or later to 6.8.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails 6.8 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 6.8 directly:

- [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]

- [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
