[[!meta title="Tails 6.0"]]
[[!meta date="Tue, 27 Feb 2024 12:34:56 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

We are very excited to present you Tails 6.0, the first version of Tails based
on Debian 12 (Bookworm) and GNOME 43. Tails 6.0 brings new versions of most of
the software included in Tails as well as several important security and
usability improvements.

[[!toc levels=2]]

<h1 id="features">New features</h1>

## Error detection on the Persistent Storage

Tails 6.0 warns you about [[errors when reading or writing|ioerror]] from
your Tails USB stick.

These alerts can help you diagnose hardware failures on your USB stick and
backup your Persistent Storage before it's too late.

## Mount external devices automatically

When you plug in an external storage device, a USB stick or an external hard
disk, Tails 6.0 mounts it automatically. If the storage device contains an
encrypted partition, Tails 6.0 offers you to unlock the encryption
automatically.

[[!img test_6.0-rc1/unlock.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt="Authentication Required. A
passphrase is needed to access encrypted data."]]

This feature also simplifies how to unlock [[*VeraCrypt* encrypted
volumes|doc/encryption_and_privacy/veracrypt]].

## Protection against malicious USB devices

If an attacker manages to plug a [[!wikipedia BadUSB desc="malicious USB
device"]] in your computer, they could run software that breaks the security
built in Tails without your knowledge.

To protect from such attacks while you are away from your computer, Tails
6.0 ignores any USB device that is plugged in while your screen is locked.

You can only use new USB devices if they are plugged in while the screen is
unlocked.

[[!img test_6.0-rc1/usbguard.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt="Notification: Reconnect
USB device. New device has been detected while you were away. Please disconnect
and reconnect the device to start using it."]]

## Dark Mode and Night Light

From the system menu of Tails 6.0, you can now switch between:

- The default *light* mode with colder colors and more brightness

  [[!img doc/first_steps/desktop/light.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

- A *dark* mode
  
  [[!img doc/first_steps/desktop/dark.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

- A *night light* mode with warmer colors and less brightness

  [[!img doc/first_steps/desktop/night.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

- A combination of both the *dark* mode and *night light* mode

  [[!img doc/first_steps/desktop/dark_night.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

## Easier screenshots and screencasts

GNOME 43 introduces a new [[!img lib/camera-photo.png alt="Take Screenshot"
class="symbolic" link="no"]] shortcut in the system menu that makes it easier
to take a screenshot or record a screencast.

[[!img doc/sensitive_documents/screenshot_and_screencast/camera.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

## Easier Gmail in Thunderbird

Thanks to changes in both Thunderbird and Gmail, it's much easier to configure
a Gmail account in Thunderbird in Tails 6.0.

- You don't have to configure anything special in your Gmail account, other
  than the usual 2-Step Verification.

- You can sign in to your Gmail account directly when configuring it in
  *Thunderbird*.

[[!img test_6.0-rc1/gmail.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt="Gmail: Sign in to continue
to Mozilla Thunderbird"]]

## Diceware passphrases in 5 more languages

When creating a Persistent Storage, suggested passphrases are now also
generated in Catalan, German, Italian, Portuguese, and Spanish.

Thanks to [[!tails_gitlab jawlensky]] who created the word lists for Catalan,
Italian, and Spanish for Tails, but also made them available to all users of
`diceware`.

[[!img test_6.0-rc1/diceware.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

## Included software

Tails 6.0 updates most of the applications included in Tails, among others:

- *Tor Browser* to [13.0.10](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-13010/).

- *Electrum* from 4.0.9 to 4.3.4

  * Improve support for the Lightning protocol and hardware wallets.

- *KeePassXC* from 2.6.2 to 2.7.4

  * Add entry tags.
  * Support dark mode.
  * Redesign history view.

- *Metadata Cleaner* from 1.0.2 to 2.4.0

  * Redesign the whole user interface.
  * Support dark mode.
  * Add support for AIFF and HEIC files.

- *Text Editor* from `gedit` to `gnome-text-editor`

  * Support dark mode.

- *Inkscape* from 1.0.2 to 1.2.2

- *Audacity* from 2.4.2 to 3.2.4

- *GIMP* from 2.10.22 to 2.10.34

- *Kleopatra* from 4:20.08 to 4:22.12

## Removed features

- Remove the icons on the desktop.

  The extension of GNOME Shell that we used to provide this feature is not well
  integrated into GNOME and created other problems. ([[!tails_ticket 19920]])

- Remove the item **Wipe** and **Wipe available disk space** from the shortcut
  menu of the *Files* browser.

  Secure deletion is not reliable enough on USB sticks and Solid-State Drives
  (SSDs) for us to keep advertising this feature.

  We updated our documentation on [[secure
  deletion|doc/encryption_and_privacy/secure_deletion]] to new recommendations:
  use encrypted volumes, overwrite the entire device, or disintegrate it
  physically.

- Remove the item **Remove metadata** from the shortcut menu of the *Files*
  browser.

  The developers of MAT2, the metadata removal library used by *Metadata
  Cleaner* are not providing this option anymore.

- Remove *GtkHash*

  You can still install *GtkHash* as [[Additional
  Software|doc/persistent_storage/additional_software]].

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Fix several issues with special characters and non-Latin scripts in the
  screen keyboard. ([[!tails_ticket 18076]])

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="issues">Known issues</h1>

- *Onion Circuits* incorrectly claims Tor is not connected. ([[!tails_ticket 20233]])

- The Welcome Screen sometimes displays a warning: **"Welcome to Tails!" is not responding**.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20236]])

  If you see this warning, click on the **Wait** button.

- Playing a video displays an error: **Failed to query: In service
  'dbus:org.freedesktop.Tracker3.Miner.Files': Unit tracker-miner-fs-3-service
  is masked.** ([[!tails_ticket 20237]])

  If you see this warning, click on the **OK** button.

- *OnionShare* is still included as version 2.2.

  We tried to include *OnionShare* 2.6 in Tails 6.0, but it has several issues
  that had security implications. ([[!tails_ticket 20135]] and [[!tails_ticket
  20140]])

- Mounting external devices automatically interferes with
  the *Back Up Persistent Storage* utility. ([[!tails_ticket 20143]])

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 6.0</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are only available from Tails 6.0~rc1 to 6.0.

  All other users have to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade#manual]].

## To install Tails 6.0 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 6.0 directly:

- [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]

- [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
