[[!meta title="Tails 6.12"]]
[[!meta date="Thu, 06 Feb 2025 00:00:00 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="security">Important security fixes</h1>

<div class="attack">

<p>The vulnerabilities described below were identified during an external
security audit by <a href="https://www.radicallyopensecurity.com/">Radically
Open Security</a> and disclosed responsibly to our team. We are not aware of
these attacks being used against Tails users until now.</p>

<p>These vulnerabilities can only be exploited by a powerful attacker who has
already exploited another vulnerability to take control of an application in
Tails.</p>

</div>

- Prevent an attacker from monitoring Tor circuits. ([[!tails_ticket 20733]] and [[!tails_ticket 20744]])

  In Tails 6.11 or earlier, an attacker who has already taken control of an
  application in Tails could then exploit vulnerabilities in *Onion Circuits*
  and our *Tor Browser* wrapper that might lead to deanonymization.

- Prevent an attacker from changing the Persistent Storage settings. ([[!tails_ticket 20745]])

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Add a button to check for upgrades from the **About Tails** utility.

  [[!img news/version_6.12/check_for_upgrades.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

- Add the keyboard shortcut **Ctrl+Alt+T** to open a *Terminal*.

- Update *Tor Browser* to [14.0.5](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-1405).

- Update *Thunderbird* to [128.6.0esr](https://www.thunderbird.net/en-US/thunderbird/128.6.0esr/releasenotes/).

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Ensure all our Python code keeps running in *isolated mode*. ([[!tails_ticket 20719]])

- Simplify the troubleshooting instructions when an automatic upgrade fails.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20466]])

- Avoid freezing the Welcome Screen while activating the Persistent Storage.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20635]])

- Made time synchronization more reliable when restarting Tor. ([[!tails_ticket 20530]])

- Display an error message when upgrading the encryption of the Persistent
  Storage to LUKS2 fails. ([[!tails_ticket 20634]])

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="issues">Known issues</h1>

- When installing additional software from your Persistent Storage fails, the
  **Configure** and **Show Log** buttons in the notification don't work.

  [[!img additional_software.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt="Notification: The installation of your additional software failed"]]

  - To configure your additional software, choose **Applications&nbsp;▸
    Persistent Storage** and click on the [[!img lib/emblem-system.png
    class="symbolic" link="no"]] button of the **Additional Software** feature.

  - To show the log, execute the following command in a *Terminal*.

    <p class="command">cat /run/live-additional-software/log</p>

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 6.12</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 6.0 or later to 6.12.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails 6.12 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 6.12 directly:

- [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]

- [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
