[[!meta title="Tails 7.6"]]
[[!meta date="Thu, 26 Mar 2026 00:00:00 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="features">New features</h1>

## Automatic Tor bridges

You can now learn about Tor bridges directly from the *Tor Connection*
assistant in Tails.

Tor bridges are secret Tor relays that hide that you are connecting to Tor.
If connecting to Tor is blocked from where you are, you can use a
bridge as your first Tor relay to circumvent this censorship. 

In Tails 7.6, choose **Connect to Tor automatically** when opening *Tor
Connection*. If access to the Tor network is blocked, the bridge configuration
screen offers a new option called **Ask for a Tor bridge based on your
region**.

[[!img doc/anonymous_internet/tor/bridge.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

This feature uses the same technology as the connection assistant in *Tor
Browser* outside of Tails, which was introduced in [[Tor Browser
11.5|https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-115/]] (July 2022).

Tails downloads information about bridges that are most likely to work in
your region from the [[Moat
API|https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/anti-censorship/rdsys/-/blob/main/doc/moat.md]]
of the Tor Project. To circumvent censorship, this connection is disguised as
a connection to another website using [[!wikipedia domain fronting]].

## GNOME Secrets

In Tails 7.6, the [[*Secrets*|https://gitlab.gnome.org/World/secrets]] password
manager replaces [[*KeePassXC*|https://keepassxc.org/]].

*Secrets* has a simpler interface and is better integrated in the GNOME
desktop. For example, accessibility features, such as the screen keyboard and
cursor size, are working again with *Secrets*.

*Secrets* offers to unlock your previous *KeePassXC* database automatically, 
because both *Secrets* and *KeePassXC* use the same file format to store
passwords.

If you miss more advanced features from *KeePassXC*, you can install
*KeePassXC* as [[additional
software|doc/persistent_storage/additional_software]].

[[!img secrets.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

<div class="tip">

  <p>The main keyboard shortcuts of <i>Secrets</i> are similar to the ones of
  <i>KeePassXC</i>, with <b>Shift</b> in addition to <b>Ctrl</b>:</p>

  <ul>
    <li><b>Shift+Ctrl+C</b>: copy password</li>
    <li><b>Shift+Ctrl+V</b>: copy address</li>
    <li><b>Shift+Ctrl+B</b>: copy username</li>
    <li><b>Shift+Ctrl+T</b>: copy one-time password</li>
  </ul>

  <p>To see the full list of keyboard shortcuts of <i>Secrets</i>, press
  <b>Ctrl+?</b>.</p>

</div>

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Update *Electrum* from 4.5.8 to [4.7.0](https://github.com/spesmilo/electrum/blob/master/RELEASE-NOTES).

- Update *Tor Browser* to [15.0.8](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-1508/).

- Update *Thunderbird* to [140.8.0](https://www.thunderbird.net/en-US/thunderbird/140.8.0esr/releasenotes/).

- Update most firmware packages. This improves support for newer hardware:
  graphics, Wi-Fi, and so on.

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Translate the confirmation dialog that appears before saving the language and
  keyboard layout on the USB stick. ([[!tails_ticket 21448]])

  [[!img version_7.6/save.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

- Fix the **Learn More** button in the *Thunderbird* migration notification. ([[!tails_ticket 21455]])

  [[!img doc/anonymous_internet/thunderbird/additional_software/manual.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

- Fix automated upgrades in Turkish. ([[!tails_ticket 21466]])

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 7.6</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 7.0 or later to 7.6.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails 7.6 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 7.6 directly:

- [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]

- [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
