[[!meta title="Tails 6.2"]]
[[!meta date="Tue, 23 Apr 2024 12:34:56 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="features">New features</h1>

We added 21 new languages to the Welcome Screen: Albanian, Armenian, Basque,
Bengali, Bulgarian, Estonian, Galician, Icelandic, Japanese, Kazakh, Korean,
Latvian, Malay, Norwegian Nynorsk, Polish, Serbian, Slovak, Swahili, Thai,
Ukrainian, and Vietnamese.

Some of these languages only have little of our custom Tails applications
translated, but other applications included in Tails are better translated.

If you want to translate Tails better in these languages or translate Tails
into other languages, you can contribute to the [Tor Project
Weblate](https://hosted.weblate.org/projects/tor/tails-gui/).

New languages will be included automatically in future versions of Tails as
soon as 25% of strings are translated.

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Update *Tor Browser* to [13.0.14](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-13014).

- Update the *Tor* client to 0.4.8.11.

- Rename the localization section of the Welcome Screen as **Language and
  Formats**.

- Make **Upgrade later** the default option in the dialog opened by **Tails
  Upgrader**.

- Include more errors in the [[detection of read and write errors|ioerror]] on
  the USB stick.

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Fix a reliability issue that disabled Wi-Fi on some hardware.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20045]])

- Disable **SysRq** keys, which allowed crashing a Tails session from the
  keyboard and bypass the lock screen. ([[!tails_ticket 20334]])

- Disable Speculative Store Bypass to improve our mitigation of Spectre
  v4.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20335]])

- Improve the error message when creating a Persistent Storage is impossible.
  ([[!tails_ticket 20328]])

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 6.2</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 6.0 or later to 6.2.

  You can [[reduce the size of the download|doc/upgrade#reduce]] of future
  automatic upgrades by doing a manual upgrade to the latest version.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails 6.2 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 6.2 directly:

- [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]

- [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
