[[!meta title="Tails 6.11"]]
[[!meta date="Thu, 09 Jan 2025 00:00:00 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="security">Critical security fixes</h1>

<div class="attack">

<p>The vulnerabilities described below were identified during an external
security audit by <a href="https://www.radicallyopensecurity.com/">Radically
Open Security</a> and disclosed responsibly to our team. We are not aware of
these attacks being used against Tails users until now.</p>

<p>These vulnerabilities can only be exploited by a powerful attacker who has
already exploited another vulnerability to take control of an application in
Tails.</p>

<p>If you want to be extra careful and used Tails a lot since January 9 without
upgrading, we recommend that you do a manual upgrade
instead of an automatic upgrade.</p>

</div>

- Prevent an attacker from installing malicious software permanently. ([[!tails_ticket 20701]])

  In Tails 6.10 or earlier, an attacker who has already taken control of an
  application in Tails could then exploit a vulnerability in *Tails Upgrader*
  to install a malicious upgrade and permanently take control of your Tails.

  Doing a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]] would erase such malicious software.

- Prevent an attacker from monitoring online activity. ([[!tails_ticket 20709]] and [[!tails_ticket 20702]])

  In Tails 6.10 or earlier, an attacker who has already taken control of an
  application in Tails could then exploit vulnerabilities in other applications
  that might lead to deanonymization or the monitoring of browsing activity:

  * In *Onion Circuits*, to get information about Tor circuits and close them.
  * In *Unsafe Browser*, to connect to the Internet without going through Tor.
  * In *Tor Browser*, to monitor your browsing activity.
  * In *Tor Connection*, to reconfigure or block your connection to the Tor network.

- Prevent an attacker from changing the Persistent Storage settings. ([[!tails_ticket 20710]])

<h1 id="features">New features</h1>

<h2>Detection of partitioning errors</h2>

Sometimes, the partitions on a Tails USB stick get corrupted. This creates
errors with the Persistent Storage or during upgrades. Partitions can get
corrupted because of broken or counterfeit hardware, software errors, or
physically removing the USB stick while Tails is running.

Tails now warns about such partitioning errors earlier. For example, if
partitioning errors are detected when there is no Persistent Storage, Tails
recommends that you reinstall or use a new USB stick.

[[!img partitioning_errors.png link="no" alt="Warning in the Welcome Screen: Errors were detected in the partitioning of your Tails USB stick."]]

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Update *Tor Browser* to [14.0.4](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-1404).

- Update *Thunderbird* to [128.5.0esr](https://www.thunderbird.net/en-US/thunderbird/128.5.0esr/releasenotes/).

- Remove support for hardware wallets in *Electrum*. Trezor wallets stopped
  working in Debian 12 (Bookworm), and so in Tails 6.0 or later.

- Disable *GNOME Text Editor* from reopening on the last file. ([[!tails_ticket 20704]])

- Add a link to the *Tor Connection* assistant from the menu of the Tor status
  icon on the desktop.

- Make it easier for our team to find useful information in *WhisperBack* reports.

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 6.11</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 6.0 or later to 6.11.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails 6.11 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 6.11 directly:

- [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]

- [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
