[[!meta title="Tails 6.7"]]
[[!meta date="Tue, 10 Sep 2024 12:34:56 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Update *Tor Browser* to [13.5.3](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-1353).

- Update *Thunderbird* to [115.15.0](https://www.thunderbird.net/en-US/thunderbird/115.15.0esr/releasenotes/).

- Update *OnionShare* from 2.2 to 2.6, which includes a feature to
  [[create an anonymous chat room|doc/anonymous_internet/onionshare#chat]].

  [[!img chat-server.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

  [[!img chat-client.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Keep the firewall on even during shutdown. ([[!tails_ticket 20536]])

- Stop reporting an error when starting an old Tails USB stick with a system
  partition of 2.5 GB. ([[!tails_ticket 20519]])

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="issues">Known issues</h1>

<h2 id="sbat">Shim SBAT verification error</h2>

If you get the following error message when starting your regular Linux
operating system, then it means that your Linux operating system is outdated.

<p class="code">
Verifying shim SBAT data failed: Security Policy Violation<br>
Something has gone seriously wrong: SBAT self-check failed: Security Policy Violation
</p>

1. Edit your UEFI settings to disable Secure Boot.

   With Secure Boot disabled, your regular Linux operating system should
   start again.

   To learn how to edit the BIOS or UEFI settings, search for the user manual
   of the computer on the support website of the manufacturer.

1. Update your regular Linux operating system.

1. Try to enable Secure Boot again in your UEFI settings.

   If your regular Linux operating system still doesn't start, then disable
   Secure Boot again. You can try to enable Secure Boot again in the future.

   It might take several months for your Linux distribution to provide updates
   before you can enable Secure Boot again.

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 6.7</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 6.0 or later to 6.7.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails 6.7 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 6.7 directly:

- [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]

- [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
