[[!meta title="Tails 6.13"]]
[[!meta date="Thu, 06 Mar 2025 09:30:00 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!tag announce]]

<h1 id="features">New features</h1>

## Detection of problems with Wi-Fi hardware

Problems with Wi-Fi are unfortunately quite common in Tails and Linux in general.

To help troubleshoot hardware compatibility issues with Wi-Fi interfaces, the
*Tor Connection* assistant now reports when no Wi-Fi hardware is detected.

[[!img no-wi-fi.png class="screenshot" alt="Warning in Tor Connection: No Wi-Fi hardware detected"]]

<h1 id="changes">Changes and updates</h1>

- Update *Tor Browser* to [14.0.7](https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser-1407).

- Update the *Tor* client to 0.4.8.14.

<h1 id="fixes">Fixed problems</h1>

- Detect partitioning errors also when Tails is started for the first time. ([[!tails_ticket 20797]])

  This solves some failures when creating the Persistent Storage on a new Tails USB stick.

- Fix the **Configure** and **Show Log** buttons in the notification when
  installing additional software fails. ([[!tails_ticket 20781]])

  [[!img version_6.12/additional_software.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt="Notification: The installation of your additional software failed"]]

For more details, read our [[!tails_gitweb debian/changelog desc="changelog"]].

<h1 id="get">Get Tails 6.13</h1>

## To upgrade your Tails USB stick and keep your Persistent Storage

- Automatic upgrades are available from Tails 6.0 or later to 6.13.

- If you cannot do an automatic upgrade or if Tails fails to start after an
  automatic upgrade, please try to do a [[manual upgrade|doc/upgrade/#manual]].

## To install Tails 6.13 on a new USB stick

Follow our installation instructions:

- [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]

- [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]

- [[Install from Linux|install/linux]]

- [[Install from Debian or Ubuntu using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]

<div class="caution"><p>The Persistent Storage on the USB stick will be lost if
you install instead of upgrading.</p></div>

## To download only

If you don't need installation or upgrade instructions, you can download
Tails 6.13 directly:

- [[For USB sticks (USB image)|install/download]]

- [[For DVDs and virtual machines (ISO image)|install/download-iso]]
