[[!meta title="Uninstalling Tails using Linux"]]

[[!inline pages="doc/first_steps/uninstall.intro" raw="yes" sort="age"]]

1. Start on Linux or Tails.

   <div class="tip">

   <p>To uninstall a Tails USB stick while running Tails from that same USB
   stick, add the <code>toram</code> boot option in the <i>Boot Loader</i>. See
   [[uninstalling Tails using Tails itself|tails]].</p>

   </div>

1. Install *GNOME Disks*.

   - If you are using the GNOME desktop environment,
     *GNOME Disks* should be installed by
     default.

   - Otherwise, install the `gnome-disk-utility`
     package using the usual installation method for your distribution.

1. Make sure that the USB stick that you want to uninstall is unplugged.

1. Open *GNOME Disks* (also called *Disks*).

   <div>
     For example, you can press the <b>Super</b> ([[!img lib/start.png class="symbolic" link="no" alt=""]]) key,
     then enter <code>disks</code> and select <b>Disks</b>.
   </div>

   The storage devices in the computer are listed in the left pane.

   [[!img install/inc/icons/gnome-disks.png link="no" alt=""]]

1. Plug in the USB stick that you want to uninstall.

   A new device appears in the list of storage devices. Select it.

1. In the right pane of the window, verify that the device corresponds
   to the USB stick that you want to uninstall, its brand, its size, etc.

   <div class="caution">

   <p>You might overwrite any hard disk on the computer.</p>

   <p>If you are not sure about the device, stop proceeding.</p>

   </div>

1. To format the USB stick, select the [[!img lib/view-more.png alt="Drive Options" class="symbolic" link="no"]] button
   in the title bar and choose **Format Disk**
   to erase all the existing partitions on the device.

1. In the **Format Disk** dialog:

   - If you want to overwrite all data on the device, choose **Overwrite
     existing data with zeroes** in the **Erase** menu.

   - Choose **Compatible with all systems and devices (MBR/DOS)** in the
     **Partitioning** menu.

1. Click **Format**.

1. In the confirmation dialog, click **Format** to confirm.

1. To make sure that all the changes are written to the USB stick, select the
   [[!img lib/system-shutdown.png alt="Power Off this Disk" class="symbolic" link="no"]]
   button in the title bar.
