[[!meta title="Uninstalling Tails using Windows"]]

[[!inline pages="doc/first_steps/uninstall.intro" raw="yes" sort="age"]]

[[!toc startlevel=2]]

Erasing Tails from the USB stick
--------------------------------

First, erase Tails from the USB stick:

1. Start on Windows.

1. Select the **Start** [[!img lib/start.png alt="" class="symbolic" link="no"]]
   button and open the *Settings* app.

1. In the *Settings* app, choose **System&nbsp;▸ Storage&nbsp;▸ Advanced
   storage settings&nbsp;▸ Disk & volumes**.

1. Plug in the Tails USB stick that you want to uninstall.

   [[!img disks.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

1. Identify the USB stick in the list of disks.

1. Identify the volume called **TAILS**, which has a FAT32 file system.

   This volume corresponds to the Tails system partition on the USB stick.

   1. Select the **Properties** button corresponding to the **TAILS** volume.

   1. In the properties of the **TAILS** volume, select **Delete**.

      Windows gives no feedback after deletion.

   1. Select **Disks & volumes** to go back to the list of volumes.

1. If there is a [[Persistent Storage|doc/persistent_storage]] on the USB
   stick, a volume called **(No label)** also appears on the USB stick.

   This volume corresponds to the Tails Persistent Storage on the USB stick.

   1. Select the **Properties** button corresponding to the **(No label)** volume.

   1. In the properties of the **(No label)** volume, select **Delete**.

      Windows gives no feedback after deletion.

   1. Select **Disks & volumes** to go back to the list of volumes.

1. The USB stick now has no volumes and is entirely unallocated.

Creating a new partition on the USB stick
-----------------------------------------

Then, create a new partition on the USB stick:

1. Select the **Properties** button corresponding to the USB stick.

1. In the properties of the USB stick, select **Convert to MBR**.

1. Select **Disks & volumes** to go back to the list of volumes.

1. Select the **Create Volume** button for the USB stick and choose **Create
   Simple Volume**.

1. In the **New Volume** dialog, enter a label of your choice and select
   **Format**.

1. Unplug the USB stick.

1. Close the *Settings* app.

1. Select the **Start** [[!img lib/start.png alt="" class="symbolic" link="no"]]
   button and open the *File Explorer* app.

1. Plug back the USB stick.

   Your new volume appears in the left sidebar of the *File Explorer*.
