[[!meta title="Git repositories"]]

<div id="intro">

<p>Tails and its website are developed in numerous Git repositories.</p>

<p><i>Git</i> is a distributed version control
system. It allows several people to work on the same source code and
handle changes in a distributed and efficient way.</p>

</div>

[[!toc levels=3]]

<a id="learn_Git"></a>

Learn Git
=========

To learn more about *Git*, refer to
its [homepage](https://git-scm.com/) and
[official documentation](https://git-scm.com/doc).

Here are a couple of links to get started with Git:

- [Git basics](https://www.atlassian.com/git), by Atlassian

- [Git immersion](https://gitimmersion.com/), a step-by-step introduction

- [Pro Git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2),
  a book on Git from basic to advanced usage.

  This book is available in several formats and languages.

<a id="general-information"></a>

General information
===================

<a id="gitlab"></a>

GitLab
------

To browse most of our repositories, see [[!tails_gitlab tails desc="our GitLab"]].

To actually contribute, you need to register. See the [[documentation about how
we're using GitLab|contribute/working_together/GitLab]].

Merge policy
------------

See our [[contribute/merge_policy]].

Repositories
============

<a id="main-repo"></a>

Main repository
---------------

This repository contains the Tails source code and the source of the website.

For instructions about cloning and forking this repository,
visit it [[!tails_gitlab tails/tails desc="on GitLab"]].

We use Git submodules, so after cloning this repository, in your new Git clone's
directory, run:

	git submodule update --init

For more information about our usage of Git submodules, see
[[the dedicated section|git#submodules]].

### Configuration

Developers with write access to the repositories should:

	git config --global url.git@gitlab-ssh.tails.boum.org:.insteadOf \
	   https://gitlab.tails.boum.org/

We also recommend the following setting in your Tails clone since it
otherwise is too easy to forget pushing updated submodules:

    git config push.recurseSubmodules check

To have `git blame` ignore specific commits that would make its output less
useful, such as automated code reformatting, run in your local clone:g ap

    git config --local blame.ignoreRevsFile .git-blame-ignore-revs

<a id="branches"></a>

### Branches

Tails development uses several branches modeled a bit like the
Debian development process. Here they are.

<a id="master_branch"></a>

#### master

The `master` branch is mostly used to build the website. It is
merged into `devel` and `stable` from time to time.
We merge into `master`:

- [[Documentation improvements|contribute/how/documentation]] that
  affect current Tails (e.g. not the next Tails release).

- Other changes to the website ([[news]], [[security advisories|security/]], layout, and so on).

- [[Translations|contribute/how/translate#website]] of the website.

- When [[releasing a new Tails|contribute/release_process/]], the branch
  the release was built from (`stable` or `testing`).

#### stable

The `stable` branch is intended to contain:

- the state of the code tagged for the last stable release
- fixes for security or important bugs.

Its purpose is to prepare bugfix releases.

#### testing

The `testing` branch is used to prepare an imminent major release: at some
point of the development process, the `devel` branch code is merged
into `testing`, frozen, and endures careful testing and bug-fixing
until this branch is considered good enough to become a stable
release. The `testing` branch is then merged into the `stable` and
`master` ones, images built and shipped and we go back to code shiny
new stuff in the `devel` branch.

Please note that the `testing` branch generally has not been granted
the same testing and attention as code that has made it into a
stable release: please use it for testing purposes but do not rely
on it for anything. No guarantee, blablabla.

#### devel

Large changes that need to be included in a release candidate
before we release them in a major Tails release are based on the
`devel` branch. This branch will never get released; instead, code
from it will be merged into testing and then into a real release.

Please note that the `devel` branch can be broken, have awful security
problems and so on. No guarantee, blablabla.

The `master` branch is merged into `devel` from time to time.

#### Topic branches

We generally use topic branches called `NNNNN-*`, with "NNNNN" being the main
issue addressed by the branch. Once ready, a topic branch is
merged (with `--no-ff`) into the appropriate branch (generally
`devel`). Until it has been merged, a topic branch's history may be
rewritten, e.g. it may be rebased on top of `devel`.

Unless there are good reasons to do otherwise, bugfix branches must be
forked off the stable branch, while feature branches
should be forked off the devel branch.

If you intend to work on a branch not really meant to be proposed to a
merge at first, like an experimenting branch that you still want to push
to share with other developers, you can disable Jenkins CI by setting `config/ci/per_branch/$branch.toml` to

```toml
[test]
skip = true
[build]
skip = true
```

Our Jenkins instance
[[!tails_gitweb bin/ci-configuration desc="will not build nor test"]] it.

<a id="promotion-material"></a>

Promotion material
------------------

This repository contains Tails [[promotion
material|contribute/how/promote]].

For instructions about cloning and forking this repository,
visit it [[!tails_gitlab tails/promotion-material desc="on GitLab"]].

<a id="other-repositories"></a>

Other repositories
------------------

Most other public Tails Git repositories are
[[!tails_gitlab tails desc="on our GitLab"]].

<a id="submodules"></a>

Submodules
==========

We use Git submodules to track external repositories from the main
Tails source tree.

The main practical consequence thereof so far, for most Tails
contributors, is that one should generally run the following command
after checking out a branch:

	git submodule update --init

For more information, see:

* the [chapter about
  submodules](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Submodules)
  in the *Pro Git* book;

* the [`git-submodule(1)`](http://manpages.debian.org/git-submodule)
  man page.

<a id="creating-a-new-repository"></a>

Creating a new repository
=========================

In the vast majority of cases, your new repository will be hosted
[[!tails_gitlab desc="our GitLab"]].

If you want to modify files that are already in one of our Git repositories,
[[!tails_gitlab help/user/project/repository/forking_workflow.md desc="create
your own fork"]] of this repository from your account on our GitLab.

Else, if you want a new repository for a different project or a new team, request it from the
[[Tails system administrators|doc/about/contact#tails-sysadmins]].
Include the following information in your request:

   - your GitLab user name
   - the preferred name of the new repository
   - which teams and individuals should have read access to this new repository
   - which teams and individuals should have write access to this new repository

Once your repository has been created, clone it:

* If you want to encrypt the content of your new Git repository with
  OpenPGP, go through some arcane
  [[initialization ritual|contribute/git#initialize-git-remote-gcrypt]]
  to reach wisdom, bliss and enlightenment.

* Otherwise (lucky you!), find your new repository
  and instructions to clone it on [[!tails_gitlab desc="GitLab"]].

<a id="initialize-git-remote-gcrypt"></a>

Initializing a git-remote-gcrypt repository
===========================================

Clone the new, empty repository in a way that tells Git it's going to
be encrypted:

	git clone gcrypt::git@gitlab-ssh.tails.boum.org:$REPOSITORY

Change directory into the newly cloned repository:

	cd $REPOSITORY

Decide whether you want to hide to the immerda administrators which
OpenPGP keys this repository will be encrypted for (note that this has
severe usability drawbacks). Skip to the next step if you really want
that. Otherwise:

	git config gcrypt.publish-participants true

Tell Git which OpenPGP keys the repository will be encrypted for:

	git config gcrypt.participants "LIST OF OPENPGP FINGERPRINTS"

Write some setup instructions for your team-mates, e.g. copy and
paste the `git config` command(s) you have just run:

	editor README

Add these setup instructions to the repository and commit:

	git add README && git commit -m 'Add setup documentation.'

Push:

	git push -u origin master

Troubleshooting
===============

First, check with your team-mates: in some cases they can help you
troubleshoot your problem, and confirm whether the problem is on your
side or on the server side. If that is not enough, get in touch with
the [[Tails system administrators|doc/about/contact#tails-sysadmins]].
