[[!meta title="Release process"]]

[[!toc levels=2]]

See the [[release_schedule]].

Context
===========

Release types
----------------

There are exactly 3 types of releases:

 - A bugfix release

 - A major release

 - A release candidate. A release candidate can only be made for a major release

We will not cover beta release in this document.

Both a bugfix release and a major release are called "final". A release candidate is not a final release.

Sections that only apply to some of those types of release, we'll have it written clearly in the title.

If you want to know whether the release you are doing is a major or not, you need to check
our [[release calendar|contribute/calendar]], and use these criteria:

 - if nothing is specified about being a major, then it's most probably a bugfix release

 - if it is a major, there has to be a release candidate before the final

Plan your journey
------------------------

The release process is long. With proper planning and some luck, it's almost
enjoyable.

Here are some useful tips that will hopefully help you have a pleasant release
process:

 - if time allows, try to unblock other people's work.
   For example, reaching the _Get the internal manual testing started_ on Monday
   would be great, because it allows manual testers to plan their job better.

 - when you are clocking off, or just spending some time afk, consider keeping
   your CPU busy with some long-running jobs. Here are some good candidates:

   - Building the final image
   - Building IUKs
   - Running the automated test suite

 - cross your fingers 🤞

Prepare your checklist
======================

1. Merge the current `master` branch into the branch used to prepare the release
   (`stable` for a bugfix release, `testing` for a major release, `devel` for a RC).

2. Copy this very file from the branch used to prepare the release
   to some place outside of Git.

3. Close the version of this file that's in Git.

4. From now on, follow the instructions in your own local copy, using it as
   a checklist: delete steps once you've successfully completed them.
   This ensures you won't mistakenly skip a step, without relying on memory, so
   "oops, I forgot X" cannot happen.

5. Remove useless sections. Some sections of this checklist only apply to specific release types (RC, Major,
   Bugfix, etc.). While you can skip them just-in-time, it's easier and less error-prone to do that now that
   you have a fresh mind. You can search for `^##* If you`.

TRAP: whenever you go AFK for long times
===========================================

Keep this section at the top of this copy of the release process, so you don't forget

When you clock off, or take any other kind of long break, please communicate this on Matrix. Clarify:

 - when do you expect to come back

 - what's the status right now

 - try to give an ETA (or clarify that you cannot) for reaching this steps:

   - When will the final image be available?

   - When will manual testers be able to start their work?


Requirements
============

Packages
--------

To release Tails you'll need some packages installed:

* `oathtool gitlab-cli j2cli intltool jq tidy libnotify-bin podman pwgen python3-bs4 python3-debian python3-git python3-gitlab python3-jinja2 python3-html2text python3-sh python3-toml python3-voluptuous moreutils wl-clipboard rename i18nspector sqopv`

  Note: if the Debian version you are running does not include all required
  Go packages, such as [[!debpts podman]], you should be able to install
  them from a more recent Debian release with APT pinning.

* `perl5lib` [[dependencies|contribute/release_process/perl5lib#build-deps]]

* `iuk` [[dependencies|contribute/release_process/tails-iuk#build-deps]]

* `squashfs-tools-ng` and `libsquashfs1` from Trixie

* `ikiwiki` from Debian testing (Forky) or newer

* `po4a` 0.73:

   - Different versions extract Markdown headings in a different way, which
     makes tons of strings fuzzy.

   - Different versions emit different sets of message flags, some of which
     are not supported by _i18nspector_ yet.

* packages to [[build a local version of the website|contribute/build/website/]]

System configuration
--------------------

- Enable unprivileged user namespaces

  If you're running a Debian kernel older than 5.10.1-1~exp1,
  set the `kernel.unprivileged_userns_clone` sysctl to 1:

        echo 'kernel.unprivileged_userns_clone=1' \
           | sudo tee /etc/sysctl.d/unprivileged-user-namespaces.conf && \
        sudo sysctl --system

Configuration files
-------------------

To release Tails you need:

* The [[correct version|contribute/working_together/GitLab#api]] of `python3-gitlab`.

* `~/.python-gitlab.cfg`

  You need at least this content:

        [global]
        ssl_verify = true

        [TailsRM]
        url = https://gitlab.tails.boum.org
        per_page = 100
        private_token = XXX

        [Tails]
        url = https://gitlab.tails.boum.org
        per_page = 100
        private_token = XXX

   Then:

   - In the `TailsRM` section, set the value of the `private_token` option to
     the `role-release-automation` GitLab user's API token, which you'll find in
     [vault](https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/tpa/team/-/wikis/service/vault). Test it with:

         python-gitlab --gitlab TailsRM -o json  project-issue get --project-id 2 --iid 6094 | jq .title

   - In the `Tails` section, set the value of the `private_token` option to a
     GitLab API token for your own user. Test it with:

         python-gitlab --gitlab Tails -o json  project-issue get --project-id 2 --iid 6094 | jq .title

* `~/.config/tails/release_management/local.yml`

  If you have no such file yet, copy
  `config/release_management/examples/local.yml` there and adjust to your
  local environment.

* SSH client (`~/.ssh/config`)

  Ensure your SSH client is configured to connect to the APT server:

        Host apt.lizard
            HostName lizard.tails.boum.org
            Port 3003

* Configure _automailer_

  To learn how, run `./bin/automailer.py --long-help`.

Environment
===========

To be able to copy'n'paste the code snippets found on this page,
you need to set a bunch of environment variables.

### Generate the base environment

1. To generate the `~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml` template,
   run:

        ./bin/rm-config generate-boilerplate

2. Edit `~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml` and replace
  `FIXME`:s:

        "${EDITOR:?}" ~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml

3. Generate the resulting environment variables and export them into your
   environment:

        eval $(./bin/rm-config generate-environment --stage base)

### Notes

* Unless the release process explicitly instructs you to change the
  value of one such variable, treat it as a constant: else,
  inconsistency will surely arise, which can cause trouble later on.

* Regarding version numbers, what follows supports just fine the case
  when we do something else than alternating bugfix and major releases
  consistently. For example, if the next two releases are bugfix ones,
  do not set `$NEXT_PLANNED_MAJOR_VERSION` to one of these
  bugfix releases. Instead, set it to the version number of the next
  major release.

* The `$NEXT*VERSION` constants are used only for two types of
  operations: preparing upgrade-description files and adding changelog
  entries. This two types of operations have to be consistent with
  each other: for example, if one adds a dummy entry for version X in
  a changelog, an UDF must exist for version X as well… hence the use
  of shared constants to encode the values that must be the same on
  both sides :)

Pre-freeze
==========

Check the Release Manager role
------------------------------

Make sure all the shift preparation steps, in the
[[contribute/working_together/roles/release_manager]] role documentation, have
been done. Fill the gaps if needed, otherwise the release process will be
blocked later.

<a id="dsa-check"></a>

Coordinate with Debian security updates
---------------------------------------

If the person responsible for Frontdesk is available this section can
be delegated to them.

### Released security updates

For each recent
[Debian Security Advisory (DSA)](https://www.debian.org/security/#DSAS)
that applies to a package we ship in our images:
check that the latest build from the release branch has the update.

If an update is missing, most likely it's a race condition and the next build
will have it. We will verify this later.

But if even a fresh build lacks the needed update, we have a problem.
It could be that the [[time-based APT snapshots|contribute/APT_repository/time-based_snapshots]]
for the `debian-security` archive have a problem. To investigate, you can:

- Check
   [when the last successful update happened](https://time-based.snapshots.deb.tails.boum.org/debian-security/project/trace/debian-security).
- `ssh reprepro-time-based-snapshots@incoming.deb.tails.boum.org` and there:
   - check the logs in `repositories/debian-security/logs/`
   - check the services: `systemctl status tails-update-time-based-apt-snapshots-debian-security-*.timer tails-update-time-based-apt-snapshots-debian-security-*.service`

### Upcoming security updates

Look at the [list of upcoming Debian Security Advisories (DSA)][DSA needed]
found in the Debian [security tracker][web]'s [Git repository][git]. Looking at recent
commits in [the Git history][DSA needed history] can reveal DSAs that
just have been assigned but that haven't been published yet.

[web]: https://security-tracker.debian.org/tracker/
[git]: https://salsa.debian.org/security-tracker-team/security-tracker
[DSA needed]: https://salsa.debian.org/security-tracker-team/security-tracker/blob/master/data/dsa-needed.txt
[DSA needed history]: https://salsa.debian.org/security-tracker-team/security-tracker/-/commits/master/data/dsa-needed.txt

Rationale: we don't want to release Tails and learn 2 days later about
important security issues fixed by Debian security updates. In some cases, it
may be worth delaying a Tails release a bit, while waiting for a DSA to happen.

Sanity check
============

Jenkins
-------

Visit the [Jenkins RM view](https://jenkins.tails.boum.org/view/RM/)
and check that the jobs for the release branch have good enough results:

 - the last build and reproducibility testing builds have succeeded for:

   - if you're preparing a final release: the release branch

   - else, if you're preparing a release candidate: the `devel` branch

 - look at the last build of the corresponding `test_Tails_ISO_*` job;
   if anything looks unusual or fishy, check the few previous builds
   to see if it's a one-off robustness issue, a serious regression,
   or what not. In particular:

   Check the results of *Scenario: All packages are up-to-date*.
   If it does not pass, evaluate whether the problems fixed in the missing
   package update are worth delaying the release. If not, create an issue
   to track them.

GitLab CI
---------

Verify that the latest [[!tails_gitlab desc="pipeline" tails/tails/-/pipelines]]
for the branch this release will be built from succeeded.

Freeze
======

This section ensures freezing is done. Freezing is relevant for Release Candidates and for bugfix releases.
You can skip this if you're releasing a final major version.

## If you are preparing a RC


Check that you are indeed preparing a RC:

    [ "${DIST:?}" = alpha ]

Follow this part ONLY if you are preparing the *first* release candidate for a major release.


1. Merge the `master` Git branch into `devel`:

        git checkout devel && git fetch origin && git merge origin/devel && git merge --no-ff origin/master

2. Merge each APT overlay suite listed in the `devel` branch's
   `config/APT_overlays.d/` into the `devel` APT suite:

        ./bin/merge-APT-overlays devel

3. Merge the `devel` Git branch into the `testing` one:

        git checkout testing && git merge origin/testing && git merge devel

   ... and check that the resulting `config/APT_overlays.d/` in the
   `testing` branch is empty.

4. Hard reset the `testing` custom APT suite to the current state of the
   `devel` one:

        ./bin/reset-custom-APT-suite testing devel

5. Freeze the [[time-based APT repository
   snapshots|APT_repository/time-based_snapshots]] that shall be used
   during the code freeze, and those used by our builder VM:

        ./bin/freeze-all-APT-snapshots

6. Make it so the time-based APT repository snapshots are kept around
   long enough, by bumping their `Valid-Until` half a year from now:

        git checkout "$RELEASE_BRANCH" && \
        ./bin/bump-APT-snapshots-expiration-date 183

## If you are preparing a Bugfix release


Check that you are indeed preparing a Bugfix:

    [ "${DIST:?}" = stable ] && [ "${MAJOR_RELEASE:?}" -eq 0 ]

Follow this part ONLY if you are preparing a bugfix release.

1. Merge the `master` Git branch into `stable`:

        git checkout stable && git fetch && git merge origin/stable && git merge --no-ff origin/master

2. Merge each APT overlay suite listed in the `stable` branch's
   `config/APT_overlays.d/` into the `stable` APT suite:

        ./bin/merge-APT-overlays stable

## In any case

Look at [[!tails_gitlab tails/tails-private]]. If anything was merged there during the current development
cycle, you need to merge.

    git fetch tails-private && \
    git log origin/"${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}"..tails-private/"${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}"

Set base branch
==================

Reset the release branch's `config/base_branch`:

    (
        echo "${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}" > config/base_branch
        git commit config/base_branch \
          -m "Restore ${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}'s base branch." || :
    )

Manual testing coordination
=============================

Bootstrap internal manual testing coordination:

1. To create a new pad, visit https://pad.tails.net/new

1. To give the pad a clear title, add this section on top:

        printf -- "---\ntitle: Testing ${VERSION:?}\n---\n"

2. Set the `PAD` environment variable to the URL of this pad.

3. Copy the [[manual test suite|contribute/release_process/test]]
   into this pad.

4. Generate boilerplate for the call for manual testing:

        ./bin/generate-call-for-manual-testers \
           --release-branch "${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}" \
           --dist "${DIST:?}" \
           --pad "${PAD:?}" \
           --version "${VERSION:?}" | ./bin/automailer.py

5. Send the call for manual testing:

    - encrypt and sign your email
    - use the headers and body generated above
    - adjust the body as needed

Update included files
=====================

Upgrade Tor Browser
-------------------

If you did not import the new Tor Browser yet, [[do so now|tor-browser]].

Update Tails version in about:tor
---------------------------------

Ensure that the about:tor patches reference the
to-be-released version of Tails:

    bin/bump-tails-version-in-about-tor "${VERSION:?}"

Update PO files
---------------

Expected time: 15-30 minutes depending on how many errors you'll get.

Pull updated translations for languages translated in Transifex,
refresh the code PO files,
and commit the result, including new PO files:

    (
     cd "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}"
     set -x
     err() { echo "Error $*"; exit 1; }
     ./import-translations || err "importing translations"
     ./refresh-translations || err "refreshing translations"
     ./submodules/jenkins-tools/slaves/lint_po || err "in lint"
     ./bin/check-po-msgfmt || err "in msgfmt"
     git add po
     git commit -m 'Update PO files.' || :
    )

If `lint_po` complains:

* rollback the offending PO files and retry; worst case, delete it
* locate the buggy strings in [Weblate](https://hosted.weblate.org/projects/tor/tails-gui/) and:
  1. Set their status to *Needs editing*. As a consequence, Weblate will mark
     the string as fuzzy and our QA tooling will stop complaining when we import it.
  2. Consider adding a comment or suggestion for translators in Weblate.
  3. Take a note to come back to it after the release, and then:
     consider adding a screenshot or a `Translators:` comment in the source code,
     ([[!tails_ticket 20410]]), to lower the risk that other translators
     make the same mistake in the future.

Regenerate the localization list:

    ./bin/locale-descriptions generate > config/chroot_local-includes/usr/share/tails/browser-localization/descriptions

Take a look at error lines that are suggesting you to add more languages to `po/po-to-mozilla.toml`. Copy-paste everything into a new issue (title: `Update mozilla locale descriptions`, content: `https://tails.net/contribute/release_process/update_locale_descriptions/` ) and move on.

Manually inspect the diffs:

    git diff config/chroot_local-includes/usr/share/tails/browser-localization/descriptions

 - Line reordering is fine

 - The only lines added or removed should reflect the addition or removal of a file with a matching name in `po/`.

   For example, if you see `zz-YY:YY` added in `config/chroot_local-includes/usr/share/tails/browser-localization/descriptions`
   it must be because of a `po/zz_YY.po` which includes a line `"Language: zz_YY\n"`, or `po/zz.po` and
   `"Language: zz\n"` if a `zz="zz_YY"` mapping exists in `po/po-to-mozilla.toml`.

Commit the changes (if any):

    git commit -m "Refresh localization list" config/chroot_local-includes/usr/share/tails/browser-localization/descriptions || :

# If you are preparing a final release

If we're about to prepare the images for a final (non-RC) release, then
follow these instructions:

## If you are preparing a Major final release

Check that you are indeed preparing a major release:

    [ "${DIST:?}" = stable ] && [ "${MAJOR_RELEASE:?}" -eq 1 ]

Merge each APT overlay suite listed in the `testing` branch's
`config/APT_overlays.d/` into the `testing` custom APT suite:

        ./bin/merge-APT-overlays testing

## If you are preparing a Bugfix release

Check that you are indeed preparing a bugfix release:

    [ "${DIST:?}" = stable ] && [ "${MAJOR_RELEASE:?}" -eq 0 ]

<div class="note">
For bugfix releases, we generally do not put any RC out, so freeze time
is the same as preparing the actual release. Hence, the following
steps have already been done above, and this section is a noop in the
general case.
</div>

Merge each APT overlay suite listed in the `stable` branch's
`config/APT_overlays.d/` into the `stable` custom APT suite:

        ./bin/merge-APT-overlays stable

Update other base branches
==========================

1. Merge the release branch into `devel`:

        ./bin/merge-main-branch "${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}" devel

   If you did *not* proceed with the merge, it means you're in a non-standard
   situation, and need to investigate what's appropriate to do.

2. [[Thaw|APT_repository/time-based_snapshots#thaw]], on the devel
   branch, the time-based APT repository snapshots being used
   during the freeze:

        git checkout devel && \
        ./auto/scripts/apt-snapshots-serials thaw && \
        git commit \
            -m "Thaw APT snapshots." \
            config/APT_snapshots.d/*/serial || :

   It's fine if that results in a no-op (it depends on how exactly previous
   operations were performed).

4. Look at the APT overlays for `$RELEASE_BRANCH` and `devel`:

        for branch in ${RELEASE_BRANCH} devel; do
            git switch ${branch}
            echo "{{{ ${branch}"
            ls config/APT_overlays.d/
            echo "}}}"
        done

   Verify that the `$RELEASE_BRANCH` and `devel` branches have nothing
   in `config/APT_overlays.d/`. If there still are unmerged APT
   overlays at this point (which is odd), please fix the situation by
   merging them using `bin/merge-APT-overlays`.

5. Push the modified branches to Git:

        git push origin                          \
           "${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}:${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}" \
           devel:devel

Update more included files
==========================

Changelog
---------

Update the Changelog entry for the release you're preparing:

	git checkout "${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}" && \
	./bin/update-changelog --version "${MILESTONE:?}"

### If you are preparing a release candidate:

 - `[ "${DIST:?}" = alpha ]`

 - Set the version for the new entry in `debian/changelog` to `$VERSION`: the
   above code has incorrectly set it to `$MILESTONE`.

### If you are preparing a major release (final or RC)

 - `[ "${DIST:?}" = alpha ] || [ "${MAJOR_RELEASE:?}" -eq 1 ]`

 - The generated changelog will include everything from any previous
   release candidates, so please make sure the new Changelog entry
   only contains merge requests introduced in this release.

 - For each merge request listed in the new Changelog entry,
   copy the "Closes: #NNNNNN" string from the MR description into the relevant
   section of the Changelog.

   If you're tempted to skip this step, see the [last discussion on this
   topic](https://gitlab.tails.boum.org/tails/tails/-/issues/21151#note_266794).

### In any case

Then, gather other useful information from the diff between the previous
version's `.packages` file and the one from the to-be-released images:

1. Generate the diff.

       if [[ "${DIST:?}" = stable ]]; then
           NEW_BRANCH="$RELEASE_BRANCH"
       else
           NEW_BRANCH=devel
       fi
   
       diff --color=never -u \
           "wiki/src/torrents/files/tails-amd64-${PREVIOUS_VERSION}.packages" \
           <(curl --silent "https://nightly.tails.boum.org/build_Tails_ISO_${NEW_BRANCH}/lastSuccessful/archive/latest.packages") \
        | wdiff --diff-input  --terminal | grep -v --perl-regexp '^[~.:+a-zA-Z_0-9 \t\s-]*$'

2. In the diff, look for:

   - new upstream releases of applications mentioned in [[doc/about/features]]
     - You can ignore new Debian releases for such packages, but you should not
       ignore minor releases or patch releases.
   - new upstream releases of other important components such as the
     Linux kernel
     - You can ignore patch releases, too (e.g: moving from a.b.c to a.b.d)

   Add those changes in `debian/changelog`.

3. Sanity check the version, commit, and push:

	    if [ "$(dpkg-parsechangelog -SVersion)" = "${VERSION:?}" ]; then
	       git commit debian/changelog -m "Update changelog for ${VERSION:?}."
	    else
	       echo 'Error: version mismatch: please compare ${VERSION:?} with the last entry in debian/changelog'
	    fi && \
        git push origin "${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}"

4. Let Technical Writers know that the changelog is ready

   - Open the [GitLab issue about the release notes](https://gitlab.tails.boum.org/groups/tails/-/issues?scope=all&search=release+notes&sort=milestone&state=opened)

   - Notify `@technical-writers` that the changelog is ready,
     and provide them a link to latest relevant Jenkins built image, so they can use that to make screenshots or write
documentation:

        (
             echo "Dear @technical-writers,"
             echo "- The changelog entry is ready: https://gitlab.tails.boum.org/tails/tails/-/blob/${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}/debian/changelog"
             echo "- The latest corresponding images built by Jenkins are there: https://nightly.tails.boum.org/build_Tails_ISO_${NEW_BRANCH}/lastSuccessful/archive/build-artifacts"
        ) | pee cat wl-copy


Included website
----------------

    ./bin/prepare-included-website-for-release

Expect this to take 5-15 minutes.
While the website is building, if this is not a good time for taking a break,
you can follow the "Enable OpenPGP signing" instructions.

Ignored versions for automatic upgrades
---------------------------------------

Add to `$IGNORED_TAGS`, in `./bin/iuk-source-versions`, any recent alpha or beta
release that gets no security support, and as such, shall not get automatic
upgrades. Here is a useful heuristics: if we did not do our manual test suite on
a release, it does not get security support.

Enable OpenPGP signing
======================

### If you have an OpenPGP smart card

If you have an OpenPGP smart card with a Tails signing subkey,
go fetch it.

Until you reach "Done with OpenPGP signing":

 - You may leave it plugged.

 - You may unplug it, when you are not signing anything with it,
   if that's more convenient for you.

### Otherwise: importing the signing key

This is only relevant when the master key has been reassembled,
e.g. for signing a Tails emergency release where none of the usual
release managers are available.

You should never import the Tails signing key into your own keyring,
and a good practice is to import it to a tmpfs to limit the risks that
the private key material is written to disk:

    export GNUPGHOME=$(mktemp -d)
    sudo mount -t ramfs ramfs "${GNUPGHOME:?}"
    sudo chown $(id -u):$(id -g) "${GNUPGHOME:?}"
    sudo chmod 0700 "${GNUPGHOME:?}"
    gpg --homedir ${HOME:?}/.gnupg --export ${TAILS_SIGNATURE_KEY:?} | gpg --import
    gpg --import path/to/private-key

Let's also ensure that strong digest algorithms are used for our
signatures, like the defaults we set in Tails:

    cp config/chroot_local-includes/etc/skel/.gnupg/gpg.conf "${GNUPGHOME:?}"

Build the almost-final images
=============================

1. [[Build ISO and USB images|contribute/build]] from the release branch,
   with `$TAILS_BUILD_OPTIONS` set like this:

   - Set `defaultcomp`, so we can more accurately optimize our
     SquashFS file ordering.

   - Do _not_ set `keeprunning`, nor `ignorechanges`, nor `rescue`.
   Expected time: 15-45 minutes depending on your computer.

2. Keep the resulting build artifacts until the end of this release process.

3. Record where the manifest of needed packages is stored:

   1. To update the `~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml` template
      with newly required variables, run:

        ./bin/rm-config generate-boilerplate --stage built-almost-final

   2. Edit `~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml` and replace
      `FIXME`:s:

        "${EDITOR:?}" ~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml

   3. Generate the resulting environment variables and export them
      into your environment:

        eval $(./bin/rm-config generate-environment --stage built-almost-final)

SquashFS file order
===================

Expected time: 20 minutes

Feel free to skip this section when preparing an emergency release.

1. Install the almost-final USB image to a USB stick.

1. Boot this USB stick a first time to trigger re-partitioning.

1. Shut down this Tails.

1. If possible, set up a wired connection to avoid having to deal
   with wireless settings.

1. Boot this USB stick **on bare metal** again.

1. Add `profile login` to the kernel command-line

1. Unless you've set up a wired connection, connect to Wi-Fi.

1. Automatically connect to Tor with _Tor Connection_.

1. Wait for _Tor Connection_ to report success.

1. Start *Tor Browser*.

1. Backup the old sort file: `cp config/binary_rootfs/squashfs.sort{,.old}`

1. 3 minutes after the start of the GNOME session, the `boot-profile` process will be
   killed. Retrieve the new sort file from `/var/log/boot-profile`.

1. Copy the new sort file to `config/binary_rootfs/squashfs.sort`.

1. To remove:

   - runtime-generated files that don't exist in the rootfs,
     in order to avoid confusing noise in the build output

   - the bits about `kill-boot-profile` at the end: they're
     only useful when profiling the boot

   - some hardware-dependent files

   Run this command:

           ./bin/clean-squashfs-sort-file config/binary_rootfs/squashfs.sort

1. Inspect the Git diff (including diff stat), apply common sense:

        diff -NaurB \
            <( cut -d' ' -f1 config/binary_rootfs/squashfs.sort.old | sort ) \
            <( cut -d' ' -f1 config/binary_rootfs/squashfs.sort     | sort ) \
            | less

1. Commit the new SquashFS sort file and clean up

        git commit -m 'Updating SquashFS sort file' \
            config/binary_rootfs/squashfs.sort && \
        rm -f config/binary_rootfs/squashfs.sort.old

Sanity check: need to redo some steps?
======================================

If you did some above steps out-of-order, in particular if you merged changes
after you went through the *Freeze* section:

1. Open a new, full copy of the release process (not the one you're reading
   right now, in which you've deleted the steps that you've completed).

2. Read everything until this section, looking for steps that have been
   invalidated by the actions done out-of-order. For example, you might need to
   update the changelog again. Take note of every such step, keeping it mind
   that redoing 1 step may in turn invalidate some other subsequent steps.

3. Redo the steps that were invalidated.

   Note: many of these steps are not idempotent, so in some cases you'll need to
   do something smarter than following the instructions as-is a second time.

4. Close the full copy of the release process that you have used for
   this section.

Build images
============

Expected time: 50-95 minutes depending on your computer and the available
Jenkins workers.

Sanity check
------------

<a id="tor-browser-check"></a>

### Tor Browser

Verify that the Tor Browser release used in Tails still is the most
recent. Also look if there's a new `-buildX` tag (e.g.
`tor-browser-60.3.0esr-8.0-1-build1`) for the Firefox version the Tor
Browser we want to ship is based on in these Git repositories:

* [tor-browser-build activity](https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/applications/tor-browser-build/activity)
  (`maint-X.Y` branch)
* [tor-browser activity](https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/applications/tor-browser/activity)

A new tag may indicate that a new Tor Browser release or rebuild is imminent.

Better catch this before people spend time doing manual tests.

### Recent DSAs

Check for [recent DSAs](#dsa-check) again. If there are important
fixes, rebuild the almost-final images and make sure the
fixed packages are installed. Updating the SquashFS file order again
is only required if a new kernel was installed.

Finalize and tag the release
----------------------------

1. Mark the version as "released" in the changelog:

        dch --release --no-force-save-on-release --maintmaint && \
        git commit -m "Mark Tails ${VERSION:?} as released." debian/changelog

1. To update the `~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml` template
   with newly required variables, run:

        ./bin/rm-config generate-boilerplate --stage finalized-changelog

1. Edit `~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml` and replace
  `FIXME`:s:

        "${EDITOR:?}" ~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml

1. Generate the resulting environment variables and export them
   into your environment:

        eval $(./bin/rm-config generate-environment --stage finalized-changelog)

1. Tag the release:

        git tag -u "${TAILS_SIGNATURE_KEY:?}" \
                -m "tagging version ${VERSION:?}" "${TAG:?}" && \
        git push origin "${TAG:?}" "${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}"

Prepare the versioned APT suites
--------------------------------

Expected time: 15 minutes

### Versioned APT suite in our custom APT repository

Within a few minutes after pushing the new release's Git tag, a cronjob
creates a new APT suite in our custom APT repository. This new APT suite is
called `$TAG` and is initially empty.

Wait for this APT suite to be created and initialize it with the packages
currently found in the APT suite corresponding to the branch used to prepare
the release:

      while ! ssh reprepro@incoming.deb.tails.boum.org reprepro list "${TAG:?}" >/dev/null 2>&1; do
         sleep 5
      done && \
      ssh reprepro@incoming.deb.tails.boum.org \
         tails-merge-suite "${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}" "${TAG:?}"

### Tagged snapshots of upstream APT repositories

Create tagged snapshots of upstream APT repositories:

      ./bin/tag-apt-snapshots "${ALMOST_FINAL_BUILD_MANIFEST:?}" "${TAG:?}"

Note:

  - This command takes a while (about a dozen minutes).

  - It's expected that the packages that were pulled from our
    [[custom APT repository|APT_repository/custom]] are
    listed under "some packages were not found anywhere" (because we
    are currently not using time-based snapshots for our custom APT
    repository). However, _no other package should be on that list_.
    Now, we have a "safety" net, in case you don't notice such a problem: if
    other packages are missing, the next build (that will use the
    newly created partial, tagged APT repository) will fail.

Build the final images
----------------------

Expected time: 30-45 minutes depending on your computer and the available
Jenkins workers.

1. Build the final images:

        rake build

   Do _not_ set `keeprunning` nor `rescue` in `$TAILS_BUILD_OPTIONS`.
   Our build system will apply the correct compression settings automatically
   so don't bother setting it yourself.

1. Manually start a build of the release branch on Jenkins, removing
   other builds from the _Build Queue_ if needed so it can start
   immediately.

   Take note of the ID of this build.

   Note that Jenkins automatically started a build earlier when you
   pushed the tag, but since the versioned APT suite wasn't finished
   by then, we avoid using that build and rely on the manually started
   one to be safe.

1. Make sure the Jenkins build is right: you can recognize this is the case,
   when you see Jenkins start building the website (which should happen in
   \~2-3 minutes). Jenkins will take
   20-30 minutes to complete the build.

1. This could be a good time for break until both builds complete!

1. Set the `MATCHING_JENKINS_IMAGES_BUILD_ID` environment variable to the ID of
   the Jenkins build.

1. Compare the new build manifest with the one from the previous,
   almost-final build:

        diff -Naur \
           "${ALMOST_FINAL_BUILD_MANIFEST:?}" \
           "${ARTIFACTS:?}/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.build-manifest"

   They should be identical, except that the `debian-security` serial might be higher.

<a id="reproducibility-sanity-check-iso"></a>

Verify that Jenkins reproduced your images
------------------------------------------

Verify that Jenkins reproduced your images:

    (
     set -eu
     cd "${ARTIFACTS:?}"
     url="https://nightly.tails.boum.org/build_Tails_ISO_${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}/builds/${MATCHING_JENKINS_IMAGES_BUILD_ID:?}/archive/build-artifacts/tails-build-artifacts.shasum"
     curl "$url" > SHA512SUMS-jenkins.txt
     grep --perl-regexp '[.]img|iso' SHA512SUMS-jenkins.txt | sha512sum -c -
    )

### If the ISO and USB images hashes match

yay, we're good to go!

Then:

1. To update the `~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml` template
   with newly required variables, run:

       ./bin/rm-config generate-boilerplate --stage reproduced-images

2. Edit `~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml`
   and set the `matching_jenkins_images_build_id` value
   to the value of `$MATCHING_JENKINS_IMAGES_BUILD_ID`:

       "${EDITOR:?}" ~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml

3. Generate the resulting environment variables and export them
   into your environment:

       eval $(./bin/rm-config generate-environment --stage reproduced-images)

### If there is a hash mismatch

 Now we are in a
 tricky situation: on the one hand it seems like a poor idea to
 block users from benefiting from this release's security updates,
 but on the other hand the failure might imply that something
 nefarious is going on. At this stage, no matter what, immediately
 fetch Jenkins' image, compare it with your, and try to rule out
 build system compromise:

      sudo diffoscope \
          --text diffoscope.txt \
          --html diffoscope.html \
          --max-report-size 262144000 \
          --max-diff-block-lines 10000 \
          --max-diff-input-lines 10000000 \
              path/to/your/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.iso \
              path/to/jenkins/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.iso

 Do the same for the USB image as well.

 Then carefully investigate the `diffoscope` report:

   - If you cannot rule out that the difference is harmful: let's take
     a step back; we might be compromised, so we are in no position to
     release. Halt the release, involve the rest of <foundations@tails.net>, and then
     try to re-establish trust in all build machines and infra
     involved, etc. Have fun!

   - Otherwise, if the change is definitely harmless:

     * If the source of non-determinism is identified quickly and
       is easy and fast to fix, *and* the QA of the current images
       has not gone very far (so at least that time is not wasted),
       then you should consider abandoning the current version, and
       immediately start preparing an emergency release with:

       - the reproducibility fix,

       - a new changelog entry,

       - adjustments to the release notes so they are re-purposed for
         this emergency release (the abandoned release gets none, since
         it effectively never will be released publicly).

     * Otherwise, if the fix looks time-consuming or difficult,
       let's release anyway. But let's add a known issue about
       "This Tails release does not build reproducibility" to the
       release notes, linking to the issue where
       the nature of the reproducibility failure is clearly
       described.

Initialize the website release branch
-------------------------------------

The final steps towards publishing
the release will be done in a new, dedicated branch.

    if [ "${DIST:?}" = alpha ]; then
        START_POINT=origin/master
    else
        START_POINT="${TAG:?}"
    fi
    git checkout -b "${WEBSITE_RELEASE_BRANCH:?}" "${START_POINT:?}" && \
    git push \
        --set-upstream \
        -o merge_request.create \
        -o merge_request.draft \
        -o merge_request.target=master \
        -o merge_request.title="Draft: Publish Tails ${VERSION}" \
        origin "${WEBSITE_RELEASE_BRANCH:?}"

Generate the OpenPGP signatures
===============================

Run the following command
to create a directory with a suitable name, go there, move the built
images to this brand new directory, generate detached OpenPGP
signatures for the images to be published (in the same directory as the
images and with a `.sig` extension):

    ./bin/generate-images-signatures

Get the internal manual testing started
=======================================

Tell testers that they can start testing. Remember to encrypt and sign your email!

    ./bin/automailer.py <<EOF
    To: rm@tails.net, sajolida@pimienta.org
    Subject: Testing Tails ${VERSION:?}
    X-Attach: $(/bin/ls -1 "$ISOS/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}".{build-manifest,packages} "$ISOS/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}/"tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.{iso,img}.sig | tr '\n' ,)

    You can now start testing Tails ${VERSION}:

    1. Download the images
    ======================

    Either use \`git-annex\` or download from
    https://nightly.tails.boum.org/build_Tails_ISO_${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}/builds/${MATCHING_JENKINS_IMAGES_BUILD_ID:?}/archive/build-artifacts/

    2. Verify the images
    ====================

    Verify the downloaded images *using the signatures attached to this email*.
    
    To verify the images, run:

        gpg --verify /path/to/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.img.sig tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.img
        gpg --verify /path/to/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.iso.sig tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.iso

    3. Save the attached build-manifest
    ===================================

    Replace any build-manifest you've downloaded with the one *attached to this email*.

    If you've downloaded the images with \`git-annex\`, you can inject
    the attachment into your local annex, to keep everything in one single place:

        git annex reinject --known /path/to/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.build-manifest

    4. Start testing :)
    ===================
    EOF

Send a message on Matrix, too:

    Tails Team, please check your inbox and get the QA started!

<a id="prepare-iuk"></a>

Prepare incremental upgrades
============================

Reference: [[design documentation|contribute/design/upgrades]]

Sanity checks
-------------

Check that you have the correct version of `squashfs-tools-ng` and `libsquashfs1` installed:

    [ "$(dpkg-query --showformat '${Version}\n' --show squashfs-tools-ng)" \
      = 1.3.2-1 \
    ] || echo 'ERROR! Your squashfs-tools-ng is not the required version, so any generated IUKs will *not* be reproducible!'
    [ "$(dpkg-query --showformat '${Version}\n' --show libsquashfs1)" \
      = 1.3.2-1 \
    ] || echo 'ERROR! Your libsquashfs1 is not the required version, so any generated IUKs will *not* be reproducible!'

Build the Incremental Upgrade Kits locally
------------------------------------------

Verify there's enough free disk space in `$IUKS_DIR`:

    N_IUKS="$(echo ${IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS:?} | wc -w)"
    MIN_DISK_SPACE=$((N_IUKS * 700))
    FREE_DISK_SPACE=$(/bin/df --block-size=M --output=avail "${IUKS_DIR:?}" \
       | tail -n1 | sed --regexp-extended 's,M$,,')
    if [ "$FREE_DISK_SPACE" -lt "$MIN_DISK_SPACE" ]; then
       echo "ERROR! Not enough free space in ${IUKS_DIR:?}"
    fi

To build the IUKS, run this command:

    (
    WORK_DIR=$(mktemp -d /tmp/tmp.iuks.XXXXXXX)
    IUK_CREATION_LOG=$(mktemp --tmpdir=/var/tmp wrap_tails_create_iuks.XXXXXXXX.log)
    (
       set -eu
       set -o pipefail
       PUPPET_TAILS_REMOTE='git@gitlab.torproject.org:tpo/tpa/puppet-control.git'
       cd "${WORK_DIR:?}"
       git clone "$PUPPET_TAILS_REMOTE"
       TMPFILES_CONF=/etc/tmpfiles.d/tails-create-iuks.conf
       OUR_TMPDIR=/var/tmp/tails-create-iuks
       echo "D ${OUR_TMPDIR} 0755 root root -" | sudo tee "$TMPFILES_CONF"
       sudo systemd-tmpfiles --remove --create "$TMPFILES_CONF"
       N_IUKS="$(echo ${IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS:?} | wc -w)"
       MIN_DISK_SPACE=$((N_IUKS * 3000))
       FREE_DISK_SPACE=$(/bin/df --block-size=M --output=avail "${OUR_TMPDIR:?}" \
          | tail -n1 | sed --regexp-extended 's,M$,,')
       if [ "$FREE_DISK_SPACE" -lt "$MIN_DISK_SPACE" ]; then
          echo "ERROR! Not enough free space in ${OUR_TMPDIR:?} (${MIN_DISK_SPACE}M needed)"
          exit 2
       fi
       CPU_CORES=$(grep '^core id' /proc/cpuinfo | sort -u | wc -l)
       MAX_JOBS=4
       JOBS=$(( CPU_CORES > MAX_JOBS ? MAX_JOBS : CPU_CORES ))
       time                                                                   \
       sudo                                                                   \
       nice                                                                   \
       ./puppet-control/site/profile/files/tails/jenkins/slaves/isobuilders/wrap_tails_create_iuks.py \
           --tails-git-remote "file://${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}/.git"             \
           --tails-git-commit "${TAG:?}"                                      \
           --source-date-epoch "${SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH:?}"                       \
           --local-isos-dir "${ISOS_GIT:?}"                                       \
           --tmp-dir "${TMPDIR:-${OUR_TMPDIR}}"                                        \
           --output-dir "${IUKS_DIR:?}"                                       \
           --source-versions "${IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS:?}"                       \
           --new-version "${VERSION:?}"                                       \
           --verbose                                                          \
           --jobs "${JOBS:?}"                                                 \
           2>&1 | tee "$IUK_CREATION_LOG"
    ) && \
    cd "${IUKS_DIR:?}" && \
    sha256sum Tails_amd64_*_to_${VERSION:?}.iuk > "${IUKS_HASHES:?}" && \
    sudo rm -rf "${WORK_DIR:?}"
    )

This command takes a long time. In parallel, while it is running,
you can follow the next steps:

1. ISO history

2. Build the Incremental Upgrade Kits on Jenkins

3. If you expect you will have to do some manual testing yourself and you have a spare computer, you can prepare a USB
   stick and start testing.

ISO history
-----------

In this section, you will push the released ISO and USB images and their artifacts (`.buildlog`,
`.build-manifest`, and `.packages` files) to our Tails ISO history git-annex
repo, so that:

 - The Jenkins `build_IUKs` job can fetch them.
 - Our isotesters can fetch them from there for their testing.

Make sure that Jenkins has finished building the images so you have set
`MATCHING_JENKINS_IMAGES_BUILD_ID` (see above), then run:

    cd "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}" && \
    ./bin/add-release-to-iso-history \
        --version "${VERSION:?}" \
        --isos "${ISOS:?}" \
        --release-branch "${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}" \
        --matching-jenkins-images-build-id "${MATCHING_JENKINS_IMAGES_BUILD_ID:?}"

Then, wait (a few minutes, `*/15` crontab) until the images appear
on <https://iso-history.tails.boum.org/?C=M&O=D>:

    "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}/bin/wait-for-images-in-iso-history" "${VERSION:?}" "${ISOS:?}"

<a id="build-iuks-on-jenkins"></a>

Build the Incremental Upgrade Kits on Jenkins
---------------------------------------------

1. Make sure the push to ISO history (started in the previous section)
   has finished, and that images have appeared on the web server:
   <https://iso-history.tails.boum.org/?C=M&O=D>

1. On <https://jenkins.tails.boum.org/job/build_IUKs/configure>, adjust
   the `SOURCE_VERSION` axis to list all versions in `$IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS`,
   and save the updated configuration.

1. On <https://jenkins.tails.boum.org/job/build_IUKs/build?delay=0sec>,
   fill the form with these values:

    - `TAILS_GIT_COMMIT`: the value of `$TAG` in your release environment

    - `SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH`: the value of `$SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH` in your
      release environment, i.e. the same value you are using to
      "Build the Incremental Upgrade Kits locally"; you can find it in
      `~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml`

    - `NEW_VERSION`: the value of `$VERSION` in your release environment

    - `EXTRA_ARGS`: leave it blank

2. Click the _Build_ button

3. After a few seconds, a new build appears on top of the _Build
   History_ sidebar. Click on the progress bar of this new build.

4. Record the ID of the Jenkins `build_IUKs` build:

   1. Take note of this ID wherever it works for you

   1. If you are still building IUKs locally, you need to stop here and wait until they
      are successfully built

   1. To update the `~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml` template
      with newly required variables, run:

          ./bin/rm-config generate-boilerplate --stage built-iuks

   1. Edit `~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml`
      and set the `candidate_jenkins_iuks_build_id` value
      to the ID of that `build_IUKs` build (an integer):

          "${EDITOR:?}" ~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml

   1. Generate the resulting environment variables and export them
      into your environment:

          eval $(./bin/rm-config generate-environment --stage built-iuks)

5. Wait until the `build_IUKs` build completes successfully.
   It should take about 15 minutes for each member of
   the `$IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS` list, distributed across `isoworkerN` workers.

   If you have a fast computer, you'll be waiting for Jenkins to be done, while
   your CPU is idle. Consider starting the [automated test
   suite](#run-automated-tests) in the meanwhile to optimize this: running it
   does not depend on any of the IUK-related steps.

<a id="reproducibility-sanity-check-iuk"></a>

Verify that Jenkins reproduced your IUKs
----------------------------------------

### Compare the IUKs

Run this command to verify that Jenkins reproduced your IUKs:

    "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}"/bin/copy-iuks-to-rsync-server-and-verify \
       --source-version-regexp "${VERSION%%.*}[.].*" \
       --hashes-file "${IUKS_HASHES:?}" \
       --work-dir /srv/tmp \
       --jenkins-build-id "${CANDIDATE_JENKINS_IUKS_BUILD_ID:?}"

The download step takes a few minutes.

If this verification succeeds, good!

Otherwise, see the next sections.

### If it fails with `urllib.error.HTTPError: HTTP Error 404: Not Found`

This problem can be expected when we are maintaining Tails `N.x` together with Tails `(N+1).y`
(for details, see [[!tails_ticket 18959]]).

If this is the case:

1. Run the same command, adding the `--ignore-404` option

2. In the output of this second attempt, verify that the only missing IUKs are not relevant to this release

### If IUK verification fails

if the last command failed:

1. Visit this page: `https://jenkins.tails.boum.org/job/build_IUKs/lastBuild/parameters/`

   It tells you which parameters you've passed to the upstream Jenkins
   job, which spawned the many workers. Make sure to use the build
   history browser to find the right `build_IUKs` job in case
   there were several attempts; the URL above assumes the last build
   is what you're interested in (see `lastBuild` part).

2. Double-check that you've passed the correct parameters.

   If you notice you made a mistake, [[build the IUKs on Jenkins
   again|release_process#build-iuks-on-jenkins]], and do the
   verification again.

   Else, if the parameters where correct, then follow the next steps.

3. Leave the IUKs built by Jenkins where they already are
   (in `rsync.lizard:/srv/tmp`): at least in some
   cases, this will speed up uploading your own IUKs later by a 500+ factor,
   thanks to `rsync --partial --inplace`.

3. File an issue about this problem.

   Specify:

    - Which set of parameters you've passed to the *build_IUKs*

      job, so that the person who'll investigate the problem
      can reproduce it.

    - The ID of the build that failed to reproduce your
      locally-built IUKs.

   Set:

    - `/label ~"To Do" ~"Tails Team"  ~"C:Continuous Integration"  ~"C:Upgrader"  ~"C:Release management"`
    - milestone: the next release

4. Later on, after you're done with OpenPGP signing,
   you will upload the IUKs you've built locally.

<a id="prepare-upgrade-description-files"></a>

Prepare upgrade-description files
---------------------------------

1. Prepare upgrade-description files (see the [[upgrade-description
   files
   specification|contribute/design/upgrades#upgrade-description-files]]
   for details).

   <div class="caution">
   In <emph>most</emph> cases the example command below is exactly the
   one you should run. But in order to tell whether you're in one of
   the exceptional cases when you have to adjust that command, it's
   important that you understand what follows.
   </div>

   At this step, we use the
   `tails-iuk-generate-upgrade-description-files` tool in order to:

   1. Create a new upgrade-description for the version being released
      and for the next one, that expresses that *no* upgrade is
      available for these ones yet.

      This is what the `--version` and `--next_version` arguments
      in the example command below do. You do not need to modify them.

    2. For every recent previous release that's _not_ listed in
       `$IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS`: tell the users of that old version they need to
       manually upgrade to the version being released.

       The example command below only does it automatically to notify users of
       N.x that they should upgrade to (N+1).y. But in other cases, you need to
       do this manually.

       To do so, pass this previous version to `--previous_version`.

   If you are releasing a RC (ie: `X.Y~rcN`), you need to manually tweak
   this to create the UDF for the next RC (even if you are not 100% sure that there
   will be a new RC), ie: `--next_version X.Y~rcN+1`.

   Run this command, after adjusting it if needed as explained above:

        ${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}/config/chroot_local-includes/usr/src/iuk/bin/tails-iuk-generate-upgrade-description-files \
            --version="${VERSION:?}" \
            $( \
                if [ "${DIST:?}" = stable ]; then
                    echo \
                        --next_version="${NEXT_PLANNED_MAJOR_VERSION:?}" \
                        --next_version="${NEXT_PLANNED_MAJOR_VERSION:?}~rc1" \
                        --next_version="${NEXT_PLANNED_BUGFIX_VERSION:?}" \
                        --next_version="${NEXT_POTENTIAL_EMERGENCY_VERSION:?}"
                else
                    echo \
                        --next_version="${NEXT_PLANNED_MAJOR_VERSION:?}" \
                        --next_version="${SECOND_NEXT_PLANNED_MAJOR_VERSION:?}"
                fi
            ) \
            $( \
                for version in "$((${VERSION%%.*}+1)).0~"{beta,rc}{1,2,3}; do
                   echo --next_version=${version:?}
                done \
            ) \
            $( \
                for version in $(echo ${IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS?}); do
                   echo "--previous_version=${version:?}"
                done \
            ) \
            $( \
                find ${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}/wiki/src/upgrade/v2/Tails \
                   -type d \
                   -name "$((${VERSION%%.*}-1)).*" \
                   '!' -name '*~testoverlayfs' \
                   -printf '--previous_version=%f ' \
            ) \
            --iso="${ISO_PATH:?}" \
            --iuks="${IUKS_DIR:?}" \
            --release_checkout="${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}" \
            --major_release="${MAJOR_RELEASE:?}" \
            --channel="${DIST:?}"

1. Create an armoured detached signature for each created or modified
   upgrade-description file.

        ./bin/sign-udfs -u

1. Verify that all UDFs are correctly signed:

        ./bin/check-udfs-signature

   If this isn't the case, check what went wrong in the signing step!

1. Add and commit the upgrade-description files and their detached
   signatures to the Git branch used to prepare the release
   (`$WEBSITE_RELEASE_BRANCH`):

        cd "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}" && \
        git add wiki/src/upgrade && \
        git commit -m "Update upgrade-description files." && \
        git push origin ${WEBSITE_RELEASE_BRANCH:?}

1. Copy the generated UDF for the previous stable release to the *test*
   channel in `$MASTER_CHECKOUT`, modify their content accordingly,
   sign them, commit and push:

        ./bin/publish-test-udfs

Prepare the image description file for the download verification
----------------------------------------------------------------

If preparing a RC, skip this part:

    [ "${DIST:?}" = stable ]

Update the image description file (IDF) used by the verification JavaScript:

    cd "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}" && \
    ./bin/idf-content \
       --version "${VERSION:?}" \
       --iso "${ISO_PATH:?}" \
       --img "${IMG_PATH:?}" \
       > wiki/src/install/v2/Tails/amd64/stable/latest.json && \
    git add wiki/src/install/v2/Tails/amd64/stable/latest.json && \
    git commit -m "Update image description file for download verification" && \
    git push origin "${WEBSITE_RELEASE_BRANCH:?}"

Delete "⚠ Wait until the Release Manager […]" in the "Image description file" section on the pad.

Check that incremental upgrades are working
==============================================

Check if the upgrades file looks good:

    (
    set -e
    cd "${MASTER_CHECKOUT:?}"
    for version in ${TEST_IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS:?}; do
        echo "Upgrade from ${version}:"
        udf="wiki/src/upgrade/v2/Tails/${version}/amd64/test/upgrades.yml"
        echo -n "- IUK: "
        grep --quiet --fixed-strings "to_${VERSION}.iuk" "$udf" && echo ok || echo missing
        echo -n "- ISO: "
        grep --quiet --fixed-strings -- "-${VERSION}.iso" "$udf" && echo ok || echo missing
    done
    )

The above output should not mention any missing IUKs/ISOs.

Done with OpenPGP signing
=========================

Unplug your OpenPGP smartcard and store it away, so you don't plug it
back semi-mechanically later on.

Upload images
=============

Sanity check
------------

* [Verify once more](#tor-browser-check) that the Tor Browser we ship
  is still the most recent.

* Check for [recent DSAs](#dsa-check) again.

Delete obsolete IUKs
--------------------

Skip this section if you're preparing a non-final release (beta, RC):

    [ "${DIST:?}" = stable ]

Delete the IUKs that upgrade to any beta or RC corresponding to the version you
are preparing:

 - first check that it's not going to remove anything we want to keep:

        ssh rsync.lizard /bin/sh -c \
            \"find /srv/rsync/tails/tails/alpha/iuk/v2  \
                   /srv/rsync/tails/tails/stable/iuk/v2 \
                   -type f \
                   -name "*_to_${VERSION:?}~*.iuk" \
                   -not -name '*~test_*~test.iuk' \
                   -not -name '*~testoverlayfs_*~testoverlayfs.iuk' \
                   -not -name '*~testoverlayfsng_*~testoverlayfsng.iuk' \
                   -ls \
            \"

 - then actually delete the files:

        ssh rsync.lizard /bin/sh -c \
            \"find /srv/rsync/tails/tails/alpha/iuk/v2  \
                   /srv/rsync/tails/tails/stable/iuk/v2 \
                   -type f \
                   -name "*_to_${VERSION:?}~*.iuk" \
                   -not -name '*~test_*~test.iuk' \
                   -not -name '*~testoverlayfs_*~testoverlayfs.iuk' \
                   -not -name '*~testoverlayfsng_*~testoverlayfsng.iuk' \
                   -print -delete \
            \"

Rationale: avoid the need for mirrors to store 3 concurrent sets of IUKs
([[!tails_ticket 17944]]). It's OK to delete them now, because we're past the
deadline we've announced in the call for testing.

<a id="publish-iuk"></a>

Publish the ISO, IMG, and IUKs over HTTP
----------------------------------------

**If** the IUKs reproducibility check you did earlier has failed,
then upload the IUKs you've built to our rsync server
(we trust your machine more than our Jenkins):

    for source_version in $(echo ${IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS:?}); do
       rsync --partial --inplace --progress -v \
          "${IUKS_DIR:?}/Tails_amd64_${source_version:?}_to_${VERSION:?}.iuk" \
          rsync.lizard:/srv/tmp/
    done

While waiting for the IUKs to be uploaded, you can proceed with the next steps.

Upload the ISO and USB image signatures to our rsync server:

    scp "${ISO_PATH:?}.sig" "${IMG_PATH:?}.sig" rsync.lizard:

Copy the ISO and USB images to our rsync server, verify their signature,
move them in place with proper ownership and permissions and update
the time in `project/trace` file on our rsync server and on the live
website (even for a release candidate):

    cd "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}" && \
    ./bin/copy-images-to-rsync-server-and-verify \
        --version "${VERSION:?}" \
        --dist "${DIST:?}" \
        --release-branch "${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}" \
        --matching-jenkins-images-build-id "${MATCHING_JENKINS_IMAGES_BUILD_ID:?}"

At this stage, either IUKs were reproduced by Jenkins and left on the
rsync server in a temporary location, or you must wait until the
upload of the locally built IUKs (started in the first part of this
section) is completed.

Finally, move the IUKs in place with proper
ownership and permissions and update the time in `project/trace` file
on our rsync server and on the live website (even for a release
candidate):

    ./bin/publish-iuks

As tracked on [[!tails_ticket 19396]], it might well be
that Mirrorbits will miss this update.
Let's be sure that this happens via

    ssh rsync.lizard sudo systemctl restart mirrorbits.service

If, at a later stage of the process, you realize Mirrorbits is still not
"noticing" that mirrors are up-to-date, don't be afraid of restarting
the Mirrorbits service again.


<a id="run-automated-tests"></a>

Run the automated test suite
===============================

This is not a required step: check the manual testers pad and see if anyone
volunteered for that. But if no one did, start the automated test suite. The
sooner, the better.

You probably already know how to do that, but keep this in mind:

 - you *need* to use the `--old-iso` option

 - you probably want to specify `--tmpdir` to point to a non-volatile directory.
   The default lives in `/tmp/`, which might lead to unpleasant surprises if,
   for whatever reasons, you need to turn off your computer.

 - if you are running this and going AFK for long time (ie: overnight) you might want to
   keep your CPU busy by rerunning failed scenarios. See the "Automatically re-run failures" section.

 - if the following conditions are met:

    - you are making out an emergency release *OR* you still feel the need to make the release as soon as
      possible for security reasons

    - *and* you are *not* running test overnight, so skipping tests will reduce the lead time

    - *then*, feel free to skip testing `@not_release_blocker`, setting
      `what=(--tag ~@not_release_blocker)` in the following example.

Automatically re-run failures
--------------------------------

The file `test-rerun.sh` will help you rerunning the test suite automatically, which avoids wasting CPU.

```sh
cp bin/test-rerun.sh ../
```

Tweak it: the `tmpdir` might especially need some customization based on your directory structure.

```sh
export VERSION ISOS PREVIOUS_STABLE_VERSION
../test-rerun.sh
```

Public testing
==============

## If you are publishing a RC

1. Verify that the image has been propagated to at least 3 mirrors:

   echo "https://download.tails.net/tails/${DIST:?}/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.img?mirrorlist"

2. Emailed <tails-testers@boum.org> to ask them to test the tentative images:

   - This is a public list, don't point to the pad.
   - Make a deadline clear: until when is feedback useful?

```sh
[ "${DIST:?}" = alpha ] && ./bin/automailer.py <<EOF
To: tails-testers@boum.org
Subject: Call for testing: ${VERSION?}

Hi,

The *candidate* images for Tails ${VERSION} are ready for testing:

https://download.tails.net/tails/${DIST:?}/tails-amd64-${VERSION}/tails-amd64-${VERSION}.img

They did not go through our entire QA yet.

Please test and report back by Tuesday, 09:00 UTC.

Thanks!
EOF
```

Lead the internal manual testing to conclusion
==============================================

1. Make sure that enough people are here to run the tests, that they
   report their results in due time, and that they make it clear when
   they're leaving for good.

1. Ensure the "Incremental upgrades" part of the manual test suite
   is done:

   1. Wait until the IUKs are available:

          for old in ${TEST_IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS:?}; do
              while ! curl --silent --head --location --fail "https://download.tails.net/tails/${DIST:?}/iuk/v2/Tails_amd64_${old}_to_${VERSION:?}.iuk"
              do
                  sleep 30
              done
          done

   1. Delete "⚠ Wait until the Release Manager […]" in the "Incremental
      upgrades" section on the pad. Replace "⚠ PLACEHOLDER" in that section
      with the versions to run the test from (i.e. the versions that UDFs
      were added for when running `publish-test-udfs` earlier):

          echo ${TEST_IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS:?}


1. Fill the gaps and make sure that the automated and manual test
   suites are done in due time.

1. If you were the one running the [automated test suite](#run-automated-tests),
   check its results.

1. Triage test results, reproduce bugs as
   needed, decide what the next step is and make sure it happens: add to known
   issues? file an issue? release blocker? improve the test description (steps,
   expected outcome)?

Prepare announcements and blog posts
====================================

What follows in this section happens on the `$WEBSITE_RELEASE_BRANCH`
branch in `${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}`, making sure we catch up with the
technical writers who have likely prepared release notes:

	cd "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}" && \
	   git checkout "${WEBSITE_RELEASE_BRANCH:?}" && \
	   git fetch && \
	   git merge "origin/${WEBSITE_RELEASE_BRANCH:?}"

If no release notes where prepared, create one with placeholders:

    cp wiki/src/news/version_${PREVIOUS_STABLE_VERSION:?}.mdwn \
       wiki/src/news/version_${VERSION:?}.mdwn &&
    ${EDITOR:?} wiki/src/news/version_${VERSION:?}.mdwn

Make sure to:

1. adjust the `!meta date` at the top.

2. adjust all version numbers everywhere appropriately.

3. add placeholders to the "Changes and updates" and "Fixed problems",
   e.g. "This section will be updated soon. Sorry for the
   inconvenience!".

4. add any known issues to the "Known issues" section.

The technical writers will update the release notes after the release.

## If you are preparing a final release

Skip this part if preparing a RC.

    [ "${DIST:?}" = stable ]

Rename, copy, garbage collect and update various files:

	./bin/add-release-files-to-website

Then, build the website and commit this last set of changes:

	if [ "$(./bin/po4a-version)" = 0.73 ]; then
	    ./build-website && \
	    git add wiki/src/{inc,torrents} && \
	    git commit -m "Update various website source files for ${VERSION:?}"
	else
	    echo "Wrong po4a version"
	fi

Ensure our [[contribute/working_together/roles/technical_writer]] has
[[written|contribute/how/documentation/release_notes]] the
announcement for the release in `wiki/src/news/version_${TAG:?}.mdwn`.

Generate an announcement mentioning the security vulnerabilities affecting the previous version
in `wiki/src/security/known_security_vulnerabilities_in_${PREVIOUS_STABLE_VERSION:?}.mdwn`, in
order to let the users of the old versions know that they have to upgrade:

        ./bin/generate-security-advisory \
           --previous-version "${PREVIOUS_STABLE_VERSION:?}" \
           --version "${VERSION:?}" \
           --tag "${TAG:?}" \
        > "wiki/src/security/known_security_vulnerabilities_in_${PREVIOUS_STABLE_VERSION:?}.mdwn"

Remove obsolete bits from `wiki/src/home/testing.html`. For example,
remove any text that's specific to a release candidate we may have
published for the version you are preparing.

## If you are preparing a RC

Skip this part if preparing a final release:

    [ "${DIST:?}" = alpha ]

Copy the signatures into the website repository:

	cp "${ISO_PATH:?}.sig" \
	   "${IMG_PATH:?}.sig" \
	   "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}/wiki/src/torrents/files/"

If our [[contribute/working_together/roles/technical_writer]] did not
prepare the announcement for the release, write it yourself:

1. Set this environment variable, in the format `YYYY-MM-DD`:

   - `FINAL_RELEASE_DATE`: the date when we plan to publish the final release
     you're preparing a RC for

2. Generate the boilerplate contents from the template:

        ./bin/generate-call-for-testing \
           --version "${VERSION:?}" \
           --tag "${TAG:?}" \
           --date "${RELEASE_DATE:?}" \
           --final-version "${NEXT_PLANNED_MAJOR_VERSION:?}" \
           --final-date "${FINAL_RELEASE_DATE:?}" \
        > ${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}/wiki/src/news/test_${TAG:?}.mdwn

3. Edit `${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}/wiki/src/news/test_${TAG:?}.mdwn`:

   - Mention major user-visible improvements.

   - Document important config changes that users of the Persistent Storage have to do
     themselves.

   - Document known issues.

   - Look for _FIXME_.

In `wiki/src/home/testing.html`, in the "Current calls for testing" section,
add a bullet point with a pointer to
the call for testing for this release candidate
(`https://tails.net/news/test_$TAG/`, that you just wrote).

In any case
-----------

Generate PO files for the pages added or updated earlier in this
section, and publish them on the `$WEBSITE_RELEASE_BRANCH` branch:

	if [ "$(./bin/po4a-version)" = 0.73 ]; then
	    ./build-website && \
	    git add wiki/src && \
	    git commit -m "Releasing version ${VERSION:?}" && \
	    git push origin "${WEBSITE_RELEASE_BRANCH:?}"
	else
        echo "Wrong po4a version"
	fi

## If you are publishing a final release: draft the Tor blog post

Check:

    [ "${DIST:?}" = stable ]

In order to announce the new Tails release on Tor blog post, you need to:
 - have a personal account on [Tor's GitLab](https://gitlab.torproject.org/) with at least *Developer* access to the [Tor blog](https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/web/blog/-/project_members)
 - Have a checkout of https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/web/blog in
   `${TOR_BLOG_CHECKOUT}`
 - Check the
   [Tor
documentation](https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/tpa/team/-/wikis/service/blog#how-to-write-a-new-blog-post-in-gitlab)
   to see if anything changed recently

- Generate the draft blog post:

        TOR_BLOG_FILE=$(./bin/generate-Tor-blog-post "${VERSION:?}" "${TAG:?}" "${DIST:?}" "${RELEASE_DATE:?}")

- Ensure the `summary` section of the draft blog post in `${TOR_BLOG_FILE}` has adequate contents:

  - If the body of the release notes has introduction sentences: copy these sentences.

  - Else, write `Tails ${VERSION:?} is now available.`

  - In any case, do *not* leave the `FIXME` placeholder as-is.

- Pay attention to the links generated for any images; they sometimes
  point to somewhere under https://blog.torproject.org but should
  always point to the image hosted on Tails website,
  https://tails.net/ (for details, see [[!tails_ticket 21237]]).

- Proof-read `${TOR_BLOG_FILE}`.

- Prepare a *draft* merge request against the [Tor blog](https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/web/blog)

        ./bin/create-tor-blog-mr "${TOR_BLOG_CHECKOUT:?}" "${VERSION:?}" "${TOR_BLOG_FILE:?}"

Go wild!
========

Wait for the HTTP mirrors to catch up
-------------------------------------

Look at the mirror status.

    (
      base="https://download.tails.net/tails/${DIST:?}"
      if [ "$((${VERSION%%.*}))" = "$((${PREVIOUS_STABLE_VERSION%%.*}))" ]; then
          echo "${base}/iuk/v2/Tails_amd64_${PREVIOUS_STABLE_VERSION:?}_to_${VERSION:?}.iuk?mirrorlist"
      fi
      if [ "$((${VERSION%%.*}))" = "$((${PREVIOUS_VERSION%%.*}))" ]; then
          echo "${base}/iuk/v2/Tails_amd64_${PREVIOUS_VERSION:?}_to_${VERSION:?}.iuk?mirrorlist"
      fi
      echo "${base}/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.iso?mirrorlist"
      echo "${base}/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.img?mirrorlist"
    ) | sort -u

Wait for each of these pages to include:
 - at least 6 working mirrors
 - at least one among the fallback mirrors: https://download.tails.net/tails/?mirrorlist

Sanity checks
-------------

* Check for any feedback in the _Internal testing_ pad.

* Check for any feedback on [tails-testers@boum.org](https://lists.autistici.org/mindex/tails-testers@20380101.000000.00000000.en.html)

* [Verify once more](#tor-browser-check) that the Tor Browser we ship
  is still the most recent.

* Check for [recent DSAs](#dsa-check) again.

Push
----

Push the last commits and set the website release branch to auto-merge.
This will make the release go live on our website once all required checks
complete successfully:

    (
      set -eu
      cd "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}"
      git checkout "${WEBSITE_RELEASE_BRANCH:?}"
      echo "stable" > config/base_branch
      git diff --quiet HEAD config/base_branch || \
        git commit config/base_branch \
          -m "Ensure base branch on 'master' remains 'stable'"
      git push origin devel:devel
      git commit --allow-empty -m "Publish Tails ${VERSION:?}"
      git push origin \
          -o merge_request.auto_merge \
          "${WEBSITE_RELEASE_BRANCH:?}"
    )

Mark the merge request for `$WEBSITE_RELEASE_BRANCH` as ready.

Close the "Write release notes" ticket manually since
`Closes:` statements are not sufficient when updating `master`.

## If you're preparing a final release: Bug tracker

Skip this part if preparing a release candidate:

    [ "${DIST:?}" = stable ]

1. Ensure you have an up-to-date `tails:gitlab-triage-stable` container image:

        cd "${MASTER_CHECKOUT:?}" && \
        git checkout master && \
        ./config/gitlab-triage/bin/ensure-up-to-date-container-image

2. Postpone to the next scheduled release any remaining open issue and merge
   request whose milestone is the version you've just released:

        cd "${MASTER_CHECKOUT:?}" && \
        git checkout master && \
        ./bin/gitlab-triage-post-release \
            --host-url "$(bin/gitlab-url TailsRM)" \
            --token "$(bin/gitlab-api-token TailsRM)"

3. Finally, submit a MR against [[!tails_gitlab tails/gitlab-config]] to
   close the just-released [[!tails_gitlab groups/tails/-/milestones
   desc="milestone"]]. See this as an example:
   [[!tails_gitlab tails/gitlab-config/-/merge_requests/18/diffs desc="tails/gitlab-config!18"]]
   
   A cheap way to do this, could be to use [Gitlab web interface to create the
MR](https://gitlab.tails.boum.org/tails/gitlab-config/-/edit/master/main.yml)

   Assign the MR to the on-duty sysadmin (see the *Tails sysadmin shifts*
   calendar on NextCloud).

### Issues linked from the website

1. Go through the issues linked from the documentation and support sections of the
   website to identify the issues that might
   be resolved in this release.

        ./bin/closed-issues-linked-from-website "${MASTER_CHECKOUT:?}"

2. Create a GitLab issue to list them.

   - Title: *Issues linked from the website for Tails $VERSION*
   - Labels: *Core Work:Technical writing* and *To Do*

Wait for the website update
---------------------------

Wait for the release to be fully published, that is for the website to have been
fully refreshed. To do so, first wait for the
[[!tails_gitlab tails/tails/-/pipelines/?ref=master desc="GitLab CI pipeline"]]
triggered by your last push to build and deploy the website. And then:

### If you are publishing a final release

Check:

    [ "${DIST:?}" = stable ]

wait until all these conditions are met:
 - <https://tails.net/news/> includes the release notes
 - <https://tails.net/news/index.de.html> includes the release notes
 - <https://tails.net/torrents/files/> includes the files
   for the new release

### If you are publishing a RC

Check:

    [ "${DIST:?}" = alpha ]

wait until `https://tails.net/news/test_$TAG/` is live.

X.com
-----

Check in the comments of the issue for the release notes if the
technical writers have prepared a tweet. Otherwise tweet a simple link
to the release notes:

    printf "Tails ${VERSION:?} is out:\n\nhttps://tails.net/news/version_${TAG:?}/\n"

To login, use your [vault](https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/tpa/team/-/wikis/service/vault)
client.

Publish the Tor blog post
-------------------------

Skip this section unless you have prepared a draft Tor blog post earlier.

  - To inspect the result, see the pipeline of the MR, in particular the
    `deploy-review` job. On top of the job page, a message will tell "This job
is deployed to ". Click on the link to the environment. Then click on "View
deployment". Check if everything looks good.

  - Merge!

  - Once merged [a new
    pipeline](https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/web/blog/-/pipelines?page=1&scope=all&ref=main&source=push)
    is started whose last stage (Deploy) will require manual action: click on it
    to open a menu where you will see "deploy-prod ▶️", then click on the ▶️ to
    deploy.

Amnesia news
------------

[Log in](https://www.autistici.org/mailman/admindb/amnesia-news)
and accept the release announcement (it's been automatically sent
to `amnesia-news@` every half hour and is stuck in the
moderation queue).

Prepare for the next development cycle
======================================

## If you just released a final release

Check that you are indeed preparing a final release:

    [ "${DIST:?}" = stable ]

1. If you just released a new stable release, remove the previous
   stable release from our rsync server:

         ssh rsync.lizard sudo rm -rf /srv/rsync/tails/tails/stable/tails-amd64-${PREVIOUS_STABLE_VERSION:?}/

1. Remove any remaining RC for the just-published release from
   `rsync.lizard:/srv/rsync/tails/tails/alpha/`.

    1. Check if there is anything:

           ssh rsync.lizard find /srv/rsync/tails/tails/alpha/ -type f

    2. Decide what to do!

1. If you've published a final release, remove IUKs that upgrade to an
   older version as they were superseded by this release:

   - first check that it's not going to remove anything we want to keep:

         ssh rsync.lizard /bin/sh -c \
             \"find /srv/rsync/tails/tails/alpha/iuk/v2  \
                    /srv/rsync/tails/tails/stable/iuk/v2 \
                    -type f -name '*.iuk' \
                    -not -name "*_to_${VERSION:?}.iuk" \
                    -not -name '*~test_*~test.iuk' \
                    -not -name '*~testoverlayfs_*~testoverlayfs.iuk' \
                    -not -name '*~testoverlayfsng_*~testoverlayfsng.iuk' \
                    -ls \
             \"

   - then actually delete the files:

         ssh rsync.lizard /bin/sh -c \
             \"find /srv/rsync/tails/tails/alpha/iuk/v2  \
                    /srv/rsync/tails/tails/stable/iuk/v2 \
                    -type f -name '*.iuk' \
                    -not -name "*_to_${VERSION:?}.iuk" \
                    -not -name '*~test_*~test.iuk' \
                    -not -name '*~testoverlayfs_*~testoverlayfs.iuk' \
                    -not -name '*~testoverlayfsng_*~testoverlayfsng.iuk' \
                    -print -delete \
             \"

1. Check how much space our mirrors need:

        ssh rsync.lizard du -sh /srv/rsync/tails

   Compare it to the minimum disk space we ask of our mirror operators
   (80 GiB) and determine if any further action is needed to either
   reduce our usage by deleting stuff, or asking them to give us more
   space.

1. Update your local `$MASTER_CHECKOUT`

        cd "${MASTER_CHECKOUT:?}" && \
        git checkout master && \
        git fetch && \
        git merge origin/master && \
        git submodule update --init

1. Remove UDFs for versions that were never released:

        cd "${MASTER_CHECKOUT:?}" && \
        git checkout master && \
        ./bin/remove-unused-udfs --before-version "${VERSION:?}" && \
        git push origin master

1. Pull `master` back and merge it into `stable`:

        cd "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}" && \
        git fetch origin && \
        git checkout stable && \
        git merge origin/stable && \
        git merge origin/master

   Note: After a final *major* release is published, it's normal to
   leave the `testing` branch alone: it will only become relevant
   again when the next freeze starts.

1. Delete Git branches that were merged:

        cd "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}" && \
        git checkout stable && \
        bare_repo=$(mktemp -d) && \
        git clone --bare --reference "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}" \
           git@gitlab-ssh.tails.boum.org:tails/tails \
           "${bare_repo:?}" && \
        PYTHONPATH=lib/python3 ./bin/delete-merged-git-branches \
           --repo "${bare_repo:?}" && \
        rm -rf "${bare_repo:?}"

1. Put the `stable` Git branch and the corresponding APT suite
   in the desired shape:

        if [ "${MAJOR_RELEASE:?}" -eq 1 ]; then
           ./bin/reset-custom-APT-suite stable testing && \
           git checkout stable && \
           if [ $(find config/APT_overlays.d -maxdepth 1 -type f | wc -l) -gt 1 ]; then
              git rm config/APT_overlays.d/* && \
              git commit config/APT_overlays.d/ \
                 -m "Empty the list of APT overlays: they were merged"
           fi
        fi

1. Increment the version number in stable's `debian/changelog`, so that
   next builds from the `stable` branch do not use the APT suite meant
   for the last release:

        cd "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT}" && \
        git checkout stable && \
        dch --newversion "${NEXT_STABLE_CHANGELOG_VERSION:?}" \
           "Dummy entry for next release." && \
        git commit debian/changelog \
           -m "Add dummy changelog entry for ${NEXT_STABLE_CHANGELOG_VERSION:?}."

1. Merge the `stable` branch and its APT suite into `devel`:

        ./bin/merge-main-branch stable devel

   When there's a merge conflict, the script aborts to let you resolve
   the conflict. Then:

   1. Resolve the conflict, `git add` and `git merge --continue`.
   2. Re-run the exact same `merge-main-branch` command.

1. Check if the version number of the last entry in `devel`'s `debian/changelog` matches
   the next major release, so that
   next builds from the `devel` branch do not use the APT suite meant
   for the last release.

   If this is not the case yet, run:

        cd "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT}" && \
        git checkout devel && \
        dch --newversion "${NEXT_PLANNED_MAJOR_VERSION:?}" \
           "Dummy entry for next release." && \
        git commit debian/changelog \
           -m "Add dummy changelog entry for ${NEXT_PLANNED_MAJOR_VERSION:?}."

1. If this command outputs anything:

         git show devel:config/chroot_apt/preferences \
            | grep -E '^Explanation: freeze exception'

   Then checkout the `devel` branch, and there
   [[thaw the packages that were granted freeze exceptions|APT_repository/time-based_snapshots#freeze-exceptions-post-release]].

1. Verify that the snapshots used for this release are ok,
   e.g. they use the correct snapshots, and they were bumped
   appropriately (they should expire after the next planned major release date).
   Look carefully at the output of this command:

        cd "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}" && \
        git checkout stable && \
        ./bin/apt-snapshots-expiry

1. Push the resulting branches:

        git push origin stable testing devel

1. Check the Firefox and Tor Browser release calendars:

   * [Tor Browser release calendar](https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/applications/tor-browser/-/wikis/Release-Schedule)

     - What we're looking for here is the *release* events, not the *rebase* ones

     - If it looks surprising, check their [release preparation
       issues](https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/applications/tor-browser-build/-/issues/?search=Prepare%20stable%20release&sort=updated_desc&state=opened).
       If necessary, ask the Tor Browser developers.

   * [Firefox Release Calendar](https://whattrainisitnow.com/calendar/)

   If the upcoming release dates in the Firefox Release Calendar does not match
   what we have in our release calendar, then alert
   <tails-dev@boum.org>, <rm@tails.net>, and explicitly Cc the
   designated RM for that upcoming release.

1. Announce the date of the next release:

         ./bin/announce-next-release-schedule "${NEXT_PLANNED_VERSION:?}"

   Adjust the body if needed:

   - If a release candidate is planned, include it in the release schedule
     and the call for manual testers.

1. Check the entries in our release calendar for the next **two** (**2**) releases.

   Each of them must:

     - exist
     - say who is the release manager

   If any of this information is missing, open an issue for each release that
   lacks a RM:

       /label ~"C:Release management" ~"Tails Team" ~"To Do" ~"P:Elevated"
       /milestone %"Tails_${NEXT_PLANNED_VERSION:?}"

1. If you are the release manager for the next release too, look at the
   tasks that must be done at the beginning of your shift in the
   [[release manager role page|contribute/working_together/roles/release_manager#shift]].

   Otherwise, kindly remind the next release manager about this :)

        ./bin/automailer.py <<EOF
        Subject: RM for Tails ${NEXT_PLANNED_VERSION}

        This is a reminder that you will be RM for Tails ${NEXT_PLANNED_VERSION}.

        Please see https://tails.net/contribute/working_together/roles/release_manager/#shift
        EOF

   - If there's a release candidate scheduled before our next release,
     do the same for the release manager of that release candidate.

1. Put aside the configuration file used for this release:

        mkdir -p ~/.config/tails/release_management/old && \
        mv ~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml \
           ~/.config/tails/release_management/old/${VERSION:?}.yml.disabled

1. You're done for today! Suggestion: enjoy some time AFK :)

1. Tomorrow, make sure Jenkins manages to build all updated major branches:
   <https://jenkins.tails.boum.org/view/RM/>.

## If you just released an RC

Check that you are indeed preparing a RC:

    [ "${DIST:?}" = alpha ]

1. If this command outputs anything:

        git show devel:config/chroot_apt/preferences \
           | grep -E '^Explanation: freeze exception'

   Then checkout the `devel` branch, and there
   [[thaw|APT_repository/time-based_snapshots#freeze-exceptions-post-release]]
   all packages (if any) that were granted freeze exceptions.

1. On the devel branch,
   [[thaw|APT_repository/time-based_snapshots#thaw]] the time-based
   APT repository snapshots:

        git checkout devel && \
        ./auto/scripts/apt-snapshots-serials thaw && \
        git commit \
            -m "Thaw APT snapshots." \
            config/APT_snapshots.d/*/serial || :

   This should generally be a no-op but if there was some hiccup earlier it
   could be needed.

1. Increment the version number in `debian/changelog` on the branch
   used for the release, to match the upcoming non-RC release, so that
   the next builds from it do not use the APT suite meant for the RC:

        cd "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT}" && \
        git checkout "${RELEASE_BRANCH:?}" && \
        dch --newversion "${NEXT_PLANNED_MAJOR_VERSION:?}" \
           "Dummy entry for next release." && \
        git commit debian/changelog \
           -m "Add dummy changelog entry for ${NEXT_PLANNED_MAJOR_VERSION:?}."

1. Increment the version number in `devel`'s `debian/changelog` to
   match the second next major release, so that images built from there
   have the right version number:

        cd "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT}" && \
        git checkout devel && \
        dch --newversion "${SECOND_NEXT_PLANNED_MAJOR_VERSION:?}" \
           "Dummy entry for next release." && \
        git commit debian/changelog \
           -m "Add dummy changelog entry for ${SECOND_NEXT_PLANNED_MAJOR_VERSION:?}." || :

1. Merge testing into devel (keeping a single changelog entry, for the
   second next major release), and push them:

        cd "${RELEASE_CHECKOUT:?}" && \
        git checkout devel && \
        git merge testing && \
        git push origin testing devel

1. Follow the "Verify that the snapshots used in the release branch
   are ok" step for final releases, above.

1. In our release calendar, mark the entry about the version that you've
   just released as released by adding " - Released" to the title.

1. Put aside the configuration file used for this release:

        mkdir -p ~/.config/tails/release_management/old && \
        mv ~/.config/tails/release_management/current.yml \
           ~/.config/tails/release_management/old/${VERSION:?}.yml.disabled

1. Delete your local copy of the IUKs

        rm -f "${IUKS_DIR:?}/"Tails_amd64_*_to_${VERSION:?}.iuk "${IUKS_HASHES:?}"

1. Delete logs

        rm -f /var/tmp/wrap_tails_create_iuks*.log

1. You're done for today! Suggestion: enjoy some time AFK :)

1. Tomorrow, on <https://jenkins.tails.boum.org/view/RM/>, make sure Jenkins
   successfully:
    - builds `devel` and `${RELEASE_BRANCH}`
    - builds the website
    - checks PO files

Related pages
=============

[[!map pages="contribute/release_process/*"]]
