[[!meta title="Set up a Tails mirror"]]

<div id="intro">

<p>Setting up a Tails HTTPS mirror helps Tails users
downloading it faster and more reliably.</p>

[[!toc levels=2]]

</div>

HTTPS
=====

Requirements
------------

In order to efficiently help users download Tails images and upgrades, you need:

- a **1Gbps** Internet uplink or faster

- **80 GiB** of disk space

- sufficiently privileged access to an **HTTPS** web server

- ability to also serve the content over Rsync

- **unfiltered access** to your web server (no GeoIP blocking, no IP bans, no
  CAPTCHAs, etc.): we want people everywhere to be able to download Tails

- either a system operated by a professional team with on-call people 24/7,
  or a high-availability setup

If you satisfy these practical requirements, please read on!

The big picture
------------------

All downloads are currently served from a diverse pool of mirrors
(see the [[design document|contribute/design/mirrors]] for details).

Every HTTPS mirror makes our files available under a fixed URL
(e.g. `https://yourdomain.org/pub/tails/`)
that contains per-version sub-directories (such as
`https://yourdomain.org/pub/tails/stable/tails-i386-lenny-0.6.2/`).

Our automated server-side redirector periodically checks each mirrors' health
(using Rsync) and is able to redirect users to the nearest mirror
based on IP geolocation data.

We only accept mirrors that provide a SSL certificate deemed valid by
Firefox for the exact hostname used.

Pick a hostname for your mirror
-------------------------------

Your web server needs to answer HTTP and HTTPS requests sent to
a _dedicated_ hostname that is unique, within our mirror pool.

Use a hostname of your choice, under a domain you control.
For example, if you control `example.com`, you can call your Tails
mirror `tails.example.com`.

Manual set up
-------------------------

### 1. Set up your web server

Set up a virtual host for the hostname chosen at the
previous step. The virtual host will need to
have indexing enabled.

Files must be served over HTTP and HTTPS. To be helpful in our
context, this requires a certificate that is considered valid by
mainstream web browsers; you can get such a certificate free of charge,
from [Let's Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org/) for example.

#### Apache configuration example

	<VirtualHost YOUR_WEBSERVER_IP:80>
	   ServerName yourdomain.org
	   RewriteEngine On
	   RewriteRule ^/?(.*) https://%{SERVER_NAME}/pub/$1 [R=permanent,L]
	</VirtualHost>

	<VirtualHost YOUR_WEBSERVER_IP:443>
	   ServerName yourdomain.org
	   ServerAdmin YOUR_EMAIL

	   SSLEngine on
	   SSLCertificateFile /etc/apache2/ssl/apache.crt
	   SSLCertificateKeyFile /etc/apache2/ssl/apache.key

	   DocumentRoot /var/www/YOUR_PATH/
	   <Directory /var/www/YOUR_PATH/>
	      Options Indexes
	      AllowOverride None
	      IndexIgnore README.html
	      IndexOptions FancyIndexing FoldersFirst IgnoreCase NameWidth=50
	      IndexOrderDefault Descending Date
	   </Directory>
	</VirtualHost>

<div class="tip">
You can harden this configuration using the
<a href="https://mozilla.github.io/server-side-tls/ssl-config-generator/">
Mozilla SSL Configuration Generator</a>.
</div>

### 2. Download the files

Download a snapshot of the current Tails files:

	rsync -rt --delete \
	         rsync.tails.net::amnesia-archive /var/www/YOUR_PATH/

<a id="cron"></a>

### 3. Schedule the pulling of the files

Your mirror should sync every hour + a random time (maximum 40 minutes).
Use `cron` or equivalent to schedule the same `rsync` command
as above. For example, you can create a file in `/etc/cron.d/` with
this content:

    0 * * * * root sleep $(shuf --input-range=0-2400 --head-count=1) && flock -n /var/run/lock/tails-mirror-rsync rsync -rt --delete rsync.tails.net::amnesia-archive /var/www/YOUR_PATH/

### 4. Set up a read-only Rsync server

You must also provide the archive via Rsync, as this is needed for our setup to
automatically determine the health of your mirror. Please take note of the
Rsync URL and include it when you send your mirrors' information to us.

You can now [[ask for your mirror to be added to the pool|mirror#http-pool]].

<a id="http-pool"></a>

Go wild: ask for your mirror to be added to the pool
----------------------------------------------------

As soon as your web and Rsync servers are ready, please email us the HTTP and Rsync
URLs so that we can add your mirror to the pool.

<div class="note">

We will publish your email address, associated with the URL of your
mirror, in a file hosted on our website. If you are not comfortable
with this, give us an email alias that we can publish without
revealing additional information, such as
<emph>webmaster@your-mirror.org</emph>.

</div>

# Talk to us

To get in touch with the sysadmins who manage our pool of mirror, write to
<sysadmins@tails.net> ([[OpenPGP key|doc/about/openpgp_keys#sysadmins]]).
