[[!meta title="Try testing versions of Tails"]]

If you are a Tails enthusiast, trying testing versions of Tails,
that preview upcoming releases and
future features, is a great way to make Tails stronger. If you like playing with
new features, identifying problems, and breaking things, then consider
[[subscribing to the tails-testers@boum.org mailing list|doc/about/contact#tails-testers]].

This is where we announce and report back on:

  - Release candidates for future releases
  - Feature previews for upcoming improvements

<div class="caution">

<strong>Do not rely on these experimental Tails images for security.</strong><br />
Only use them for testing purposes.

</div>

Release candidates
==================

We sometimes publish a release candidate. It has the same
features as the upcoming release but needs testing to validate that they are
working correctly.

The release candidates are also announced in our [[news]] and
<a href="https://download.tails.net/tails/alpha/">
are available online</a>.

What you can test on them:

  - The new features, as described in the Changelog, linked from the
    announcement.

  - Any other feature of Tails, for example the ones listed in our [[manual test
    suite|contribute/release_process/test/]].

Feature previews
================

Every now and then, we also publish testing version of Tails to test more specifically a new
feature we are working on.

They are available on <https://nightly.tails.boum.org/> and are announced
together with specific testing instructions.

Pro-active testing
==================

To help spot bugs before we release them, you can do exploratory testing
of experimental images built from our `stable` branch:

<https://nightly.tails.boum.org/build_Tails_ISO_stable/lastSuccessful/archive/build-artifacts/>

If you find a bug in one such image, that you cannot reproduce in the last
released version of Tails, please [[report it using
WhisperBack|doc/first_steps/whisperback]], making it clear which experimental
image you are testing.
