[[!meta title="Automated test suite"]]

[[!toc levels=3]]

# Introduction

The automated test suite is essentially a glue between:

* [OpenCV](http://opencv.org/) and
  [dogtail](https://fedorahosted.org/dogtail/), used for simulating
  user interaction,

* [libvirt](http://libvirt.org/), used for running a specific build of
  Tails in a virtual machine, and

* [cucumber](https://cucumber.io/), for defining features and scenarios
  testing them using the above two components.

* [chutney](https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/core/chutney),
  for orchestrating a local Tor network.

Its goal is to automate the development and release testing processes
with a Continuous Integration server.

## Setup and usage

See [[contribute/release_process/test/setup]] and [[contribute/release_process/test/usage]].

## Jenkins

This section documents test suite usage in the context of Jenkins.

For details about how automated tests run on our Jenkins
infrastructure, see
[[automated tests in Jenkins|https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/tpa/team/-/wikis/tails/services/jenkins/automated-tests-in-jenkins]].

### Full test suite vs. scenarios tagged `@fragile`

Jenkins generally only runs scenarios that are _not_ tagged `@fragile`
in Gherkin. But it runs the full test suite, including scenarios that
are tagged `@fragile`, if the images under test were built:

 - from a branch whose configuration (`config/ci/per_branch/`) has `force_all_tests = true` in the `[test]`
   section
 - from a tag
 - from the `devel` branch
 - from the `testing` branch

Therefore, to ask Jenkins to run the full test suite on your topic
branch, create `config/ci/per_branch/$branch.toml` and set it to

```
[test]
force_all_tests = true
```

### Configure CI per-branch

It's sometimes desirable to configure CI for a specific branch. Typical usecases are:
 - disabling CI (e.g. to avoid wasting Jenkins' CPU cycles)
 - forcing all tests to be run, including `@fragile` ones

To do so, you can create `config/ci/per_branch/${branch}.toml`.

Example: disable all CI

```toml
[test]
skip = true
[build]
skip = true
```

Example: force all tests

```toml
[test]
force_all_tests = true
```

Have a look at [[!tails_gitweb bin/ci-configuration]] (specifically the classes inheriting from
`BaseModel`) to have a list of possible options you can use.

### Run without Chutney

Chutney, which creates a "virtual" Tor network, is used by default.

You can disable this by setting `real_Tor = true` in the `[test]` section of `config/ci/per_branch/$branch.toml`. This will only run scenarios which are tagged
`@supports_real_tor` (not many!)

### Trigger a test suite run without rebuilding images

Every `build_Tails_ISO_*` job run triggers a test suite run
(`test_Tails_ISO_*`), so most of the time, we don't need
to manually trigger test suite runs.

However, in some cases, all we want is to run the test suite multiple
times on a given set of Tails images, that were already built. In such
cases, it is useless and problematic to trigger a build job, merely to
get the test suite running eventually:

 - It's a waste of resources: it will keep isobuilders uselessly busy,
   which makes the feedback loop longer for our other team-mates.

 - It forces us to wait at least one extra hour before we get the
   test suite feedback we want.

Thankfully, there is a way to trigger a test suite run without having
to rebuild images first. To do so:

1. On the corresponding `test_Tail_ISO_*` job page, click _Build with
   Parameters_.

2. Optionally, you may also pass arbitrary arguments to:

   - `run_test_suite`, via the `EXTRA_SUITE_ARGS` job parameter.

     For example, you can pass `--disable-chutney` so that all tests use the
     real Tor network.

   - Cucumber, via the `EXTRA_CUCUMBER_ARGS` job parameter.

     For example:

     - If you set this parameter to `features/mac_spoofing.feature`, then Cucumber
       will run only the scenarios from the `mac_spoofing.feature` feature.

     - If you set this parameter to `--tags @automatic_upgrade`, then Cucumber
       will run only the scenarios that are tagged `@automatic_upgrade`.

### Developer access to the Jenkins infrastructure

Tails Team members can:

 - SSH into Jenkins worker VMs as their own user and use password-less sudo there

 - SSH into the Jenkins orchestrator as the `jenkins` user: `ssh jenkins@jenkins.dragon`

### Known usability issues

We collect a list of other known CI usability issues on a dedicated
blueprint: [[!tails_blueprint CI_usability]].

If something feels odd, misleading, or confusing, please check that page:
perhaps it explains the problem you're experiencing; else, please add it.

## Features

With this tool, it is possible to:

  * Create, modify and destroy virtual machines that can run Tails from
    a variety of media (primarily DVD and USB drives).

  * Create different kinds of virtual storage (IDE, USB, DVD...),
    and either cold or hot plug/unplug them into/from the
    virtual machine.

  * Modify the virtual machine's hardware, e.g. its amount of RAM,
    its processor features (PAE), etc.

  * Simulate user interaction with the system under testing and check
    its state.

  * Run arbitrary shell commands inside the virtual machine.

  * Take screenshots from the display of the virtual machine, at
    particular events, like when a scenario fails. Complete test
    sessions can also be captured into a video.

  * Capture and analyze the network traffic of the system under testing.

## source vs. product cucumber features

Fundamentally speaking there are two types of tests:

* Tests that make sure that the Tails *sources* behave correctly *at
  build time* (example: `features/build.feature`); these ones are
  aptly tagged `@source`; and,

* Tests that make sure that the product built from Tails sources, i.e.
  a Tails ISO image, behaves correctly *at run time*; these ones are
  tagged `@product`.

The requirement of these are quite different; for instance, a
`@product` test must have access to a Tails ISO image to test, whereas a
`@source` test doesn't. Therefore their environments are setup
separately using our custom `BeforeFeature` hook, with the respective
tag.

# Implementation

## Running cucumber in the right environment

The `run_test_suite` script is a wrapper on top of `cucumber`, that
sets the correct environment up:

* It uses `Xvfb` so that the `DISPLAY` environment variable points to
  an unused X display (tip: use `Xvfb`) with screen size and color
  depth matching what the images used for matching are optimized for
  (that is, 1024x768 / 24-bit).

* It runs `unclutter` on `$DISPLAY` to prevent the mouse
  pointer from masking GUI elements looked for through image matching.

* It passes `--format ExtraHooks::Pretty` to `cucumber` calls, to get
  access to our custom `{After,Before}Feature` hooks.

## Remote shell

This started out as a hack, and while it has evolved it largely
remains so. A proper, reliable, established replacement would be
welcome, but seems unlikely given the requirements.

Requirements on the host (the remote shell client):

* can execute a command with blocking until command completion on the
  server, and get back return code, stdout and stderr separately.

* can spawn a command without blocking (except an ACK that the server
  has run the command, perhaps).

* usable by an unprivileged user

Requirements on the guest (the remote shell server):

* has to work without a network connection.

* should interfere minimally with the surrounding system (e.g. no
  firewall exceptions; actually we don't want any network traffic at
  all from it, but this kind of follows from the previous requirement
  any way)

* must start before the Welcome Screen. Since that's the first point of
  user interaction in a Tails system (if we ignore the boot menu), it
  seems like a good place to be able to assume that the remote shell
  is running.

Scripts:

* [[!tails_gitweb config/chroot_local-includes/usr/local/lib/tails-autotest-remote-shell]]
* [[!tails_gitweb config/chroot_local-includes/lib/systemd/system/tails-autotest-remote-shell.service]]

### Using the remote shell with non-test suite Tails VMs

The remote shell could potentially be useful for debugging a Tails VM
that was not started as part of the automated test suite. To do that,
add a virtio channel device to the libvirt config of the VM:

```xml
<channel type='unix'>
  <source mode="bind" path='/path/to/remote-shell.socket'/>
  <target type='virtio' name='org.tails.remote_shell.0'/>
</channel>
```

When the VM has started you can connect to the socket and execute
commands via the remote shell. Here is an example how to do that in
Python:

```py
import json
import socket


client = socket.socket( socket.AF_UNIX, socket.SOCK_STREAM )
client.connect("/path/to/remote-shell.socket")

id = 1
_type = "sh_call"
env = {}
user = "root"
cmd = "echo 'huhu?"
data = [id, _type, user, env, cmd]
client.send(json.dumps(data).encode()+b"\n")

answer = json.loads(client.recv(1024).decode())
print(answer)
>>> '[1, "success", 1, "huhu?", ""]\n'
```

## Chutney

Chutney is an orchestration tool for quickly setting up a complete Tor
network: directory authorities, entry/middle/exit nodes, bridges,
etc. In Tails' test suite we use it to locally set up a Tor network
that is under our control to be used by the system under testing,
offering us greatly improved performance and robustness compared to if
we used the real Tor network.

- [[!tails_gitweb_repo chutney]]
- [[!tails_gitweb features/chutney/test-network]]

# Expected, reference images

Expected images, aka. reference images, live in [[!tails_gitweb_dir
features/images]].

When adding or updating one such image, run the
[[`compress-image.sh`|contribute/how/documentation/compress-image.sh]]
script on it before committing your changes.

# The art of writing new product test cases

Writing new `@source` features, scenarios or steps should be pretty
straightforward for anyone with experience with `cucumber`, but the
same can't be said about `@product` tests, so below we give some
pointers for the latter.

## Resources

In addition to the libvirt and Cucumber documentation linked
to in the introduction:

 * [ruby-libvirt API](http://libvirt.org/ruby/api/index.html)

 * The `sniff` application, which is installed in Tails, is quite
   useful to navigate the GUI element hierarchy. However, `accerciser`
   (not installed) is even better, due to its ability to highlight
   elements. Another useful tool is `ipython` (not installed) with its
   TAB-completion.

## Writing new features and scenarios

First, one should have a good look at especially
`features/step_definitions/common_steps.rb` and the other features to
get a general idea of what already is possible. There is a good chance
there's already implementations for many steps necessary for reaching
the desired state right before when the stuff special to the intended
feature begins.

### Common steps example

In order to learn some basic step dependencies, and concepts and
features of the automated test suite used in features and scenarios,
let's walk through a few typical steps, in order:

    Given a computer

This is how each scenario (or background) should start. This step
destroys any residual VM from a previous scenario, and sets up a
completely fresh one, with all defaults. The defaults are defined in
`features/domains/default.xml`, but some highlights are:

* One virtual `x86_64` CPU with one core
* A reasonable amount of RAM
* ACPI, APIC and PAE enabled
* UTC hardware clock
* A DVD drive loaded with the Tails from the ISO
* No other storage plugged
* USB 2.0 controller
* Ethernet interface, plugged into a network bridged with the host

However, most of the time we do not set up a computer from scratch
using this step, but restore from a snapshot (also called checkpoint)
using the one of the `Given Tails has booted ...` steps generated in
`features/step_definitions/snapshots.rb`. An example of such a step,
and indeed one of the most common ones, is:

    Given Tails has booted from DVD and logged in and the network is connected

These steps will actually run multiple steps, saving one or more
snapshots along the way. See the next section for details about this.

Returning back to what we'd do after the `Given a computer` step,
there's a number of steps that reconfigures the computer...

    And I create a 10 GiB disk named "some_disk"

The identifier (`some_disk`) is later used if we want to plug it or
otherwise act on it. Note that all media created this way are backed
by [[!wikipedia qcow2]] images, which grow only as they consume
capacity. All such media can be destroyed after the feature ends
by using "I create a temporary…" instead.

This step does not necessarily have to be run this early, but it does
if we want to plug it as a non-removable drive...

    And I plug ide drive "some_disk"

Note that we can decide which type of drive `some_disk` is here. If we
pick a non-removable media, like in this case, it has to be done
before we start the virtual machine. Removable media, such as USB
drives, can be plugged into a live system at any later point.

    And the network is plugged

This plugs the network interface to the host-bridged network (which is
the default). There's also the "unplugged" version, which generally is
preferred for features that don't rely on the network (mostly so we
won't hammer the Tor network unnecessarily). These steps can also be
performed on a already running system under test.

    And I start the computer

This is where we actually boot the virtual machine.

    And the computer boots Tails

This step:

* verifies that we see the boot menu
* adds any boot options added via `I set Tails to boot with options ...`
* makes sure that the Welcome Screen starts
* makes sure that the remote shell is up and running

Note that the "I set sudo password ..." step has to be run before the
other option steps of the Welcome Screen as it relies on keyboard navigation.

    And I set sudo password "asdf"

Beyond the obvious, after this step all steps requiring the
administrative password have access to it.

    And I log in to a new session
    And the Tails desktop is ready
    And I have a network connection
    And Tor is ready

All these should be pretty obvious. It could be mentioned that the
last two steps, like many others, depend on the remote shell to
be working.

    And all notifications have disappeared

The notifications can block GUI elements that we're looking for later
with OpenCV's image matching, so it's important that they are gone in
essentially all tests of GUI applications. If we have a network
connection, so the time syncing starts and shows its notifications,
then this step should be run after the previous step. Otherwise it
always depends on the `GNOME has started` step.

    And available upgrades have been checked

Since Tor is working, the check for upgrades will be run. We have to
wait for it to complete because that generally will break later if we
use snapshots.

### Snapshots

To speed up the test suite and get consistent results when setting up
state, we make heavy use of virtual machine snapshots. We encourage
contributors to read the snapshot definitions in
`features/step_definitions/snapshots.rb` carefully. We generate steps
from these descriptions, and they are created lazily on first use (and
then reused in subsequent instances, across features). Some things to
make note of:

* Snapshots may have parents, which means that they start by running
  the parent's step, generating its snapshot, recursively to a "root"
  snapshot without parent.

* Snapshots can be made "temporary". If the snapshot description's
  `:temporary` field is set to `true`, then the snapshot
  will be cleared after the feature it was created in finishes. This
  is a way to reduce the disk space needed for running the test suite,
  and is encouraged to use for features where a very particular state
  is set up, that isn't reused in any other feature.

* Debugging snapshot creation is made a lot easier by enabling the
  `debug` formatter, which will print the steps as they are run.

### Scenarios involving the Internet

Each such new scenario should sniff network traffic, and check that
all Internet traffic has only flowed through Tor. See the `apt`
feature for a simple example of how to do it.

### The interactive debugging REPL

Running the test suite with the `--interactive-debugging` option can
be really useful when investigating problems in the test suite (or
developing new steps/scenarios, which usually means encountering a lot
of problems) since it allows invoking a debugging REPL in the context
a failure occurred at, where you can rapidly iterate on code and find
solutions.

The debugging REPL is not only accessible when failures occur, you can
also manually put a "breakpoint" either directly in the code using
`pause()`, or by adding the step "I pause" at a suitable place in a
scenario.

While it is quite nice to copy-paste code between your editor and the
debugging REPL, we can do better: you can edit the code in the usual
files in your editor, and then hot-reload them in the debugging REPL
with `reload_step_definitions()`. That reloads all `.rb` files in
`features/step_definitions/` (so it actually doesn't only affect step
definitions but function definitions, constants etc. too) so any
changes outside of these are _not_ reloaded. You can modify any `.rb`
file and load it with `reload_code('path/to/file.rb')` or even reload
all code with `reload_all_code()`, but this requires knowing what you
are doing (see the "Limitations of code reloading" section
below). Avoid using the built-in `load()` since it does not support
redefining steps, which our `reload_code()` does.

#### Example: interactive debugging

Let's say we have a scenario:

```gherkin
Scenario: test
  Given some context
  When I do foo
  Then foo was successful
  And maybe more stuff
```

Let's say there is a bug in the `I do foo` step that makes it raise
some exception. So we insert a breakpoint before `I do foo`:

```gherkin
Scenario: test
  Given some context
  And I pause
  When I do foo
  Then foo was successful
  And maybe more stuff
```

(Instead of injecting a breakpoint we could also rely on
`--interactive-debugging`, but this way we can fix the bug and let the
full scenario run with the fix when we quit the REPL.)

We start the test suite for the problematic scenario, and it stops at
the breakpoint we injected:

```
Paused

Return/q: Continue; d: Debugging REPL
```

We press `d` to enter the debugging REPL, which is a normal `pry`
session (very similar to `irb` if you are familiar with it):

```
[1] pry(#<Object>)>
```

We test the `I do foo` step and observe the failure:

```
[1] pry(#<Object>)> step 'I do foo'
RuntimeError: something went wrong
from features/step_definitions/test.rb:36:in `/^I do foo$/'
```

Then I start fixing `I do foo` where it was originally defined, in
`features/step_definitions/test.rb`, using my editor, and if I want to
try my modification I can reload the code by calling
`reload_step_definitions()`.

So we reload the code and test it:

```
[2] pry(#<Object>)> reload_step_definitions
[... warnings about modifying constants ...]
=> nil
[3] pry(#<Object>)> step 'I do foo'
RuntimeError: something else went wrong this time
from features/step_definitions/test.rb:36:in `/^I do foo$/'
```

We're not quite there yet! Also, something to keep in mind is that if
`I do foo` changes some state, that state might have to be manually
reverted in the REPL before calling the modified `I do foo` again (so the
easiest situation is if `I do foo` is idempotent).

So we hack, hack, hack and eventually:

```
[...]
[9] pry(#<Object>)> reload_step_definitions
[... warnings about modifying constants ...]
=> nil
[10] pry(#<Object>)> step 'I do foo'
We at least didn't raise an exception!
=> nil
```

Wohoo! We are done!? Not necessarily, let's say that while the
modifications we did indeed made `I do foo` not raise an exception there
still is an issue that won't be detected until we run the `foo was
successful` step. So we might want to incorporate that into our test
loop (and again, if `foo was successful` changes state it might have
to be manually reverted afterwards):

```
[11] pry(#<Object>)> step 'foo was successful'
RuntimeError: Step "I do foo" did something wrong earlier
from features/step_definitions/test.rb:40:in `/^foo was successful$/'
```

Again we hack, hack, hack and eventually:

```
[...]
[21] pry(#<Object>)> reload_step_definitions
[... warnings about modifying constants ...]
=> nil
[22] pry(#<Object>)> step 'I do foo'
We did the correct thing!
=> nil
[23] pry(#<Object>)> step 'foo was successful'
Step "I do foo" did the correct thing earlier!
=> nil
```

Now we can just quit the REPL (`exit` or Ctrl+D) and cucumber will
continue the run, invoking the redefined version of `I do foo` which
also makes `foo was successful` happy, and the scenario should pass
(unless there is an issue in the `maybe more stuff` step, then we
rinse and repeat)!

#### Example: stack navigation

When an error is caught with `--interactive-debugging` and you start
the debugging REPL you will not necessarily start in the context where
the error was raised. For convenience reasons it's preferred to put
you in our code's context instead of deep in some module or cucumber,
because generally the error lies in our step definitions. But even in
our code we skip the contexts of some our helpers, for instance, if
the error occurred in a code block passed to `try_for()` you generally
are not interested in the context inside `try_for()` where it raises
its own exception, you want the context where `try_for()` was called
from. Let's look at an example of just that:

```
From: features/step_definitions/test.rb:3 :

    1: When /^I fail through try_for$/ do
    2:   foo = 42
 => 3:   try_for(1, delay: 0.1) do
    4:     bar = "this variable will not be in scope"
    5:     assert_equal(0, foo)
    6:   end
    7: end

[1] pry(#<Object>)> foo
=> 42
[2] pry(#<Object>)>
```

So here we could investigate what `foo` actually was set to (which was
obvious in this silly example, but in general `foo` would probably get
its value as a return value from a function or be similarly
opaque). But what if we suspect `try_for()` has a bug?

You can investigate the call stack with the `stack` command, which
will show you something like this:

```
Stack: <method> (<instance>) at <source location>
     try_for() (#<Object>) at features/support/helpers/misc_helpers.rb:145
     try_for() (#<Object>) at features/support/helpers/misc_helpers.rb:51
  => <top-level> (#<Object>) at features/step_definitions/test.rb:3
     cucumber_instance_exec() (#<Object>) at /usr/lib/ruby/vendor_ruby/cucumber/core_ext/instance_exec.rb:25
     cucumber_run_with_backtrace_filtering() (#<Object>) at /usr/lib/ruby/vendor_ruby/cucumber/core_ext/instance_exec.rb:42
[...]
```

You can move up in the stack with the `up` command (and down with the
`down` command):

```
[3] pry(#<Object>)> up

From: features/support/helpers/misc_helpers.rb:51 Object#try_for:

    46: # XXX: giving up on a few worst offenders for now
    47: # rubocop:disable Metrics/AbcSize
    48: # rubocop:disable Metrics/CyclomaticComplexity
    49: # rubocop:disable Metrics/MethodLength
    50: # rubocop:disable Metrics/PerceivedComplexity
 => 51: def try_for(timeout, **options)
    52:   return yield if block_given? && timeout.nil?
    53: 
    54:   options[:delay] ||= 1
    55:   options[:log] = true if options[:log].nil?
    56:   last_exception = nil

Stack: <method> (<instance>) at <source location>
     try_for() (#<Object>) at features/support/helpers/misc_helpers.rb:145
  => try_for() (#<Object>) at features/support/helpers/misc_helpers.rb:51
     <top-level> (#<Object>) at features/step_definitions/test.rb:3
     cucumber_instance_exec() (#<Object>) at /usr/lib/ruby/vendor_ruby/cucumber/core_ext/instance_exec.rb:25
     cucumber_run_with_backtrace_filtering() (#<Object>) at /usr/lib/ruby/vendor_ruby/cucumber/core_ext/instance_exec.rb:42
     [...]
[4] pry(#<Object>)>
```

Ruby has these "extra" contexts for various constructs, e.g. loops
tend to create a new one. So to get to the actual point the exception
was raised we call `up` once more:

```
[4] pry(#<Object>)> up

From: features/support/helpers/misc_helpers.rb:145 Object#try_for:

    140:   if last_exception
    141:     msg += "\nLast ignored exception was: " \
    142:            "#{last_exception.class}: #{last_exception}"
    143:     msg += "\n#{last_exception.backtrace.join("\n")}"
    144:   end
 => 145:   raise exc_class, msg
    146: end
    147: # rubocop:enable Metrics/AbcSize
    148: # rubocop:enable Metrics/MethodLength
    149: # rubocop:enable Metrics/PerceivedComplexity
    150: # rubocop:enable Metrics/CyclomaticComplexity

Stack: <method> (<instance>) at <source location>
  => try_for() (#<Object>) at features/support/helpers/misc_helpers.rb:145
     try_for() (#<Object>) at features/support/helpers/misc_helpers.rb:51
     <top-level> (#<Object>) at features/step_definitions/test.rb:3
     cucumber_instance_exec() (#<Object>) at /usr/lib/ruby/vendor_ruby/cucumber/core_ext/instance_exec.rb:25
     cucumber_run_with_backtrace_filtering() (#<Object>) at /usr/lib/ruby/vendor_ruby/cucumber/core_ext/instance_exec.rb:42
     [...]
```

and then we can access the variables in this context, e.g.:

```
[5] pry(#<Object>)> last_exception
=> #<Test::Unit::AssertionFailedError: <0> expected but was
<42>.>
```

#### Example: writing a new scenario

Let's say we want to implement the silly scenario from the previous
example, so we first create `features/test.feature`:

```gherkin
@source
Feature: test

Scenario: test
  Given some context
  When I do foo
  Then foo was successful
  And maybe more stuff
```

We run this feature, and cucumber will actually output the step
definition stubs we need:

```
[...]
1 scenario (1 undefined)
4 steps (4 undefined)
0m0.004s

You can implement step definitions for undefined steps with these snippets:

Given(/^some context$/) do
  pending # Write code here that turns the phrase above into concrete actions
end

When(/^I do foo$/) do
  pending # Write code here that turns the phrase above into concrete actions
end

Then(/^foo was successful$/) do
  pending # Write code here that turns the phrase above into concrete actions
end

Then(/^maybe more stuff$/) do
  pending # Write code here that turns the phrase above into concrete actions
end
```

which we put into `features/step_definitions/test.rb`, but we replace
`pending` with `pause` to get a breakpoint in each of these step
definition stubs:

```rb
Given(/^some context$/) do
  pause
end

When(/^I do foo$/) do
  pause
end

Then(/^foo was successful$/) do
  pause
end

Then(/^maybe more stuff$/) do
  pause
end
```

Then we run the feature again. and we work similarly to how we did in
the previous example, now implementing the new steps by doing the
following as we encounter each of their breakpoints:

1. we interactively test code snippets in the debugging REPL and
   explore solutions,
2. we take the good bits and write them into the step definition in
   `features/step_definitions/test.rb`,
3. we run `reload_step_definitions` + `step ...` to test it,
4. we iterate until the step passes and does what we want it to,
5. and then we finally escape the breakpoint and see cucumber run the
   step successfully.

After the last step we have implemented the whole scenario and all its
steps in a single run, avoiding the costs of having to re-run the
scenario multiple times just to test some change we did to some step.

Like we mentioned in the previous example, some steps alter state and
have to be manually reverted so you have the required state to test
the step with again. If the revert is awkward or time consuming, and
this is mostly about the Tails VM's state, do not hesitate to manually
save a snapshot in the debugging REPL with `$vm.save_snapshot('foo')`,
and then restore it with `$vm.restore_snapshot('foo')` before `step
...` each time you want to test it. Note that this will not revert any
Ruby state, like `@class_variables` and `@global_variables` used by
some steps.

#### Limitations of code reloading

Reloading some support code in `features/support` can have weird
consequences, and this area has not been explored much. For instance,
after calling `reload_all_code()` odd errors have occurred _after_ the
run completes:

```
1 scenario (1 passed)
12 steps (12 passed)
0m2.799s
features/support/helpers/vm_helper.rb:817:in `lookup_domain_by_name': Connect has been freed (ArgumentError)
        from features/support/helpers/vm_helper.rb:817:in `remove_all_snapshots'
        from features/support/hooks.rb:89:in `block in <top (required)>'
```

Who knows what else is broken? So use `reload_code()` and
`reload_all_code()` at your own risk!

## Writing new steps

### The tools and some guidelines for their usage

In essence, the tools we have for interacting with the Tails instance
are:

* the VM helper class,
* the Screen helper class,
* dogtail, and
* the remote shell.

It should be fairly obvious when to use the VM helper class (stuff
relating to the virtual hardware), but there is some overlap between
image matching, dogtail and the remote shell.

The Screen class and dogtail:

* They should be used in all instances where we want to simulate user
  interaction with the Tails system. For instance, when we start an
  application we usually want to click our way through the GNOME
  applications menu to stay true to what an actual user would do.

* They come in handy when we want to verify some state pertaining
  to the GUI.

* In general we prefer dogtail, since it is more precise given its
  direct access to GUI elements and their state, and images carry a
  quite heavy maintenance burden. However, Dogtail is not possible to
  use before GNOME has started, so we rely on image matching for
  anything before or after that. Also, for some applications it's
  simply hard to "navigate" to the right element in the hierarchy of
  elements of some GUI, due to ambiguity and/or lack of labels.

* When dogtail is not available or not convenient, there are two more
  tools: images and OCR.

  * Images can be matched, with the most common method being
    `@screen.wait` (there are actually more). This is very practical
    to have, with the main disadvantage being that images needs to be
    bumped over time:
      1. language changes (and sometimes also localization changes)
      2. rendering changes (typically when migrating to a new Debian suite)

  * OCR can be matched using `@screen.wait_text`. This is more "greppable",
    but it still has limitations: don't expect the OCR engine to be able
    to follow text which is wrapped in a dialog, for example.

The remote shell:

* Useful for testing non-GUI state.

* Useful for reaching some state required before we test stuff
  depending on user interaction (which should use the Screen class
  or dogtail!).

* It is acceptable (but not encouraged) to use the remote shell for
  simulating user terminal interaction when we need to analyze the
  commands output.

# Limitations and issues

These things are good to know when developing new features, scenarios
or steps.

## The remote shell

### Different behaviour compared to "real" shell

The remote shells have a few surprises in store:

* `pgrep -f` detects itself, which can have potentially serious
  consequences if not dealt with.

* Minor groups are not set, so e.g. the `groups` command may not do
  what you expect, but `groups $USER` does.

These are the currently known oddities of the remote shell, but there
may be more, so beware, and make sure to verify that any commands sent
through it do what you want them to do.

### Remote shell instability

Although very rare, the remote shell can get into a state where it
stops responding, resulting in the test suite waiting for a response
forever.

### Remote shell interaction during early boot

When it is needed to interact with the system before a certain service
has started during the boot process, you must do the following:

* Make sure that `tails-autotest-remote-shell.service` is started
  before the other service. It might be enough to add
  `Before=other.service`, as is currently done for `gdm.service`,
  but that will for instance not suffice for services with an earlier
  `WantedBy=` target.
* You then hook your code to be run before the service by passing it
  as a code block to the `add_early_boot_hook` method. This code will
  execute during the `the computer boots Tails` step, so your scenario
  must use that step.

As an example, you can look how the `<device> is damaged in a way that
some read operations fail` step hooks into the system before
`gdm.service` is started.

All this is achieved by defining the remote shell systemd service as
notify type, so any services that depends on it are blocked until
systemd is told the remote shell is ready to proceed. That is done by
executing `RemoteShell::SignalReady.new($vm)`, which is done in the
`the computer boots Tails`, right after executing the early boot
hooks.

* [[!tails_gitweb features/hardware_failure.feature]]
* [[!tails_gitweb features/step_definitions/hardware.rb]]

## Plugging SATA drives

When creating a disk (at least when backed by a `raw` image) via the
storage helper, and then plugging it to a Tails instance as SATA
drive, GNOME will report that the drive is failing when inside Tails,
and indeed several SMART tests fail. For now, plug hard disks as IDE
only (or USB, of course).

## Passing state between steps in snapshots

When creating snapshots, anything stored in a variable in any of those
steps will only be available in subsequent steps in that scenario, not
in other scenarios restoring from that snapshot. The exception is when
global variables are used, which is an acceptable workaround, but it
is very hard to get right, and to follow. Please
try to avoid this until [[!tails_ticket 5847]] is solved.

## Disabling scenarios that are known to fail

When a scenario is broken for an extended period of time (e.g. when
rebasing Tails on a new Debian version, which usually breaks tons of
stuff) the current method of temporarily disabling affected tests is
simply to remove them in Tails' Git, making sure that we won't forget
about them.

Note that such removals should be isolated per commit so that they are
easy to revert when whatever was broken is fixed. Hence, such a commit
could either:

* remove a single scenario if something unique to that scenario is
  broken;

* remove multiple scenarios possibly spanning multiple features, if
  they're broken for the same reason, e.g. a step they all use is
  broken;

* remove a complete feature, if the complete feature is broken for the
  same reason.

Each such commit *must* have an issue created, referencing the commit
to revert.

## Cucumber tags

We use the following Cucumber tags on scenarios and features:

- `@fragile`: this test lacks robustness and sometimes yields false
  positive failures.

- `@doc`: the copy of our website included in the system-under-test affects the
  outcome of this test.

- `@check_tor_leaks`: this instructs the test suite machinery to check
  that all outgoing connections initiated during this test go through Tor.

- `@slow`: this test takes a long time to run (rule of thumb: more than 10
  minutes on lizard).

- `@not_release_blocker`: we don't abort the release process if this test fails;
  instead, we create a GitLab issue to fix it in the next release.

Our Jenkins setup uses these tags to decide which tests to run:
[[automated tests in Jenkins|https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/tpa/team/-/wikis/tails/services/jenkins/automated-tests-in-jenkins]].

# Tips and tricks

## Iterate quickly with `--late-patch`

Let's say that our test suite is reporting you an error. You want to make a fix and see if it makes the test
suite happy again. Usually, you would be required to build the image again, which is slow.

You can do better than this using `--late-patch`:

 - create a file called, for example `late-patch-fix-foobar.txt`

 - every line contains two filenames, a source one and a destination one.

 - run the test suite using `--late-patch late-patch-fix-foobar.txt`

Here is an example of a late-patch file that is well suited to iterate over _Tor Connection_:

```
# python files
config/chroot_local-includes/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages/tca/application.py	/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages/tca/application.py
config/chroot_local-includes/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages/tca/ui/main_window.py	/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages/tca/ui/main_window.py
# UI
config/chroot_local-includes/usr/share/tails/tca/main.ui.in	/usr/share/tails/tca/main.ui
config/chroot_local-includes/usr/share/tails/tca/time-dialog.ui.in	/usr/share/tails/tca/time-dialog.ui
config/chroot_local-includes/usr/share/tails/tca/tca.css	/usr/share/tails/tca/tca.css
# helpers
config/chroot_local-includes/usr/local/lib/tca-portal	/usr/local/lib/tca-portal
config/chroot_local-includes/usr/local/lib/tails-get-network-time	/usr/local/lib/tails-get-network-time
```
