[[!meta title="Test suite installation and setup"]]

Here's how to set up an environment to run our automated test suite.

Once you have a working environment, see [[test/usage]].

[[!toc levels=2]]

Operating system
================

If you usually run another operating system than Debian
Trixie or Sid, then you need to:

1. Enable nested virtualization on your host system.

   For example, if the host system has an Intel CPU:

       if [ "$(cat /sys/module/kvm_intel/parameters/nested)" != Y ]; then
          echo "options kvm_intel nested=Y" | \
               sudo tee /etc/modprobe.d/kvm.conf
       fi

2. Prepare a Debian virtual machine; we recommend the stable release.

3. And then, every step below applies to this virtual machine, instead
   of to the host system.

Install dependencies
====================

To install the dependencies on our test suite:

1. Enable the `non-free` APT component.

1. If you are running Debian Forky or newer, pin Cucumber
   related packages to the versions in Trixie ([[!tails_ticket
   21463]]):

       if [ "$(lsb_release --short --codename)" != trixie ]; then
           sudo tee /etc/apt/preferences.d/cucumber.pref <<EOF
       Package: cucumber ruby-cucumber-core ruby-cucumber-wire ruby-gherkin
       Pin: release n=trixie, o=Debian
       Pin-Priority: 1000
       EOF
       fi

1. Install the following packages:

       sudo apt update && \
       sudo apt install \
           cucumber \
           dbus-x11 \
           devscripts \
           dnsmasq-base \
           gawk \
           git \
           imagemagick \
           libcap2-bin \
           libnss3-tools \
           libvirt-clients \
           libvirt-daemon-system \
           libvirt-dev \
           libvirt0 \
           obfs4proxy \
           openssh-server \
           ovmf \
           pry \
           python3-debian \
           python3-distro-info \
           python3-requests \
           python3-psycopg2 \
           python3-slixmpp \
           python3-tomli-w \
           python3-yaml \
           qemu-system-common \
           qemu-system-x86 \
           qemu-utils \
           qrencode \
           ruby-guestfs \
           ruby-json \
           ruby-libvirt \
           ruby-packetfu \
           ruby-net-dns \
           ruby-rb-inotify \
           ruby-rspec \
           ruby-test-unit \
           seabios \
           tcpdump \
           tcplay \
           tesseract-ocr \
           tor \
           unclutter \
           virt-viewer \
           x11vnc \
           tigervnc-viewer \
           x264 \
           xdotool \
           xfwm4 \
           xvfb \
           ffmpeg \
           python3-opencv \
           python3-paramiko \
           python3-pil \
           python3-pydantic \
           python3-typeguard \
           && \
       sudo service libvirtd restart

Other requirements
==================

Synchronized clock
------------------

Enable `systemd-timesyncd.service` or your favorite time synchronization tool:
the system running the test suite needs an accurate clock.

File permissions
----------------

The user that runs QEMU (via libvirt) needs read-access at least to
the content of `features/misc_files/` in the Git checkout.

Firewall
----------

If you have a firewall enabled, check that you can receive connections from VMs back to your host
system. A typical rule to accomplish this might be:

```
iptables -I INPUT 1 -i virbr+ -j ACCEPT
```

but of course this depends on the specific firewall you have.

The rule posted above will accept any connections from any VM you have on your system. If you have other VMs
running on your system and don't want to accept their connection, take care before running this
command.

Special use cases
=================

Access the system under test with VNC
-------------------------------------

If you're running the test suite in a nested environment, install
`tigervnc-viewer` on the bare metal level-0 host. Then you can use vncviewer's
`-via` option so that it automatically setup a ssh tunnel to your first level
test suite domain for you and display the Tails VM. E.g.
where `$DISPLAY` is the display given to you by `run_test_suite` (often 0):

    vncviewer -viewonly -via user@level0 localhost:$DISPLAY
