[[!meta title="System requirements and recommended USB sticks"]]

[[!toc startlevel=2 levels=2]]

<h2 id="computer">System requirements</h2>

Tails works on most PC computers that are less than 10 years old.

Tails does not work on:

- Mac computers with an Apple processor (M1, M2, and so on)
- Smartphones or tablets
- Raspberry Pi

Tails might not work on some PC computers, for example, if their [[graphics
card is incompatible with Linux|support/known_issues/graphics]]. Nvidia or AMD
Radeon cards often do not work in Tails.

<p>See our [[list of known hardware compatibility
issues|support/known_issues]].</p>

### Detailed hardware requirements

- 3 GB of RAM to work smoothly.

  Tails can work with less than 3 GB RAM but might experience reduced
  performance, instability, or crashes.

- The ability to start from a USB stick or a DVD reader.

- A 64-bit [[!wikipedia x86-64]] [[!wikipedia IBM PC compatible]]
  processor.

  * Tails does not works on
    [[!wikipedia ARM_architecture desc="ARM"]] or
    [[!wikipedia PowerPC]] processors.

  * Tails does not work on 32-bit computers since [[Tails 3.0|news/Tails_3.0_will_require_a_64-bit_processor]] (June 2017).

### Recommended laptops

Laptop models evolve too rapidly for us to be able to provide an up-to-date
list of recommended hardware. Below are some guidelines if you, or your
organization, are considering acquiring a laptop dedicated to running Tails.

#### For PC

- Avoid "gaming" models with Nvidia or AMD Radeon graphics cards.

- Consider buying a refurbished laptop from a high-end (professional) series.
  These are cheaper and will last longer than new but lower-quality laptops.

  * For example, the Lenovo ThinkPad series work well with Tails,
    including the X250, X1 Carbon, T440, T480, and T490 models.

  * If you live in a part of the world where buying refurbished laptops is
    uncommon, look on eBay and Amazon. Amazon offers a 90-day [Amazon Renewed
    Guarantee](https://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html?nodeId=G4ZAA22U35N373NX).

- Consider buying a new laptop from vendors who guarantee the compatibility
  with Linux and Tails like [ThinkPenguin](https://www.thinkpenguin.com/).

#### For Mac

Tails still works on some older Mac computers with an Intel processor.

Unfortunately, we don't know of any Mac model that works well in Tails and can
run the latest macOS version.

<!--

To update the list of Mac computer:

1. Store an archive of WhisperBack reports from the last 6 months in a folder.

2. Decrypt all the reports:

   ~/Tails/blueprints/stats/whisperback_scripts/decrypt.rb

3. Extract the list of computer models:

   ~/Tails/blueprints/stats/whisperback_scripts/content_of.rb "/usr/sbin/dmidecode -s system-product-name" > machines

4. Sort and count identical models:

   grep -v Bug_report machines | sort | uniq -c | sort -rhk 1 > top

5. Share WhisperBack reports number with the Tails team and ask them to
   evaluate hardware compatibility hints in those reports.

   While analyzing the reports corresponding from each model, FT should:

   - Check whether they were sent from the same email address, if any

   - Check whether the wlan0 interface was the same hardware device

   - Check whether the report was about hardware compatibility issues

6. Check whether these Mac models still support the latest version of macOS.

To update the list of PC computers:

- Check what's commonly available with refurbishing companies.

- Ask assembly@ for models.

-->

<h2 id="usb">Recommended USB sticks</h2>

You need a USB stick of 8 GB minimum to use Tails.

All the data on this USB stick is lost when installing Tails.

The quality of your USB stick is crucial when using Tails. A bad USB stick will
be slower and more likely to corrupt the files in your [[Persistent
Storage|doc/persistent_storage]].

We recommend that you:

- **Buy new USB sticks.**

  USB sticks become slower and less reliable over the years. Older USB sticks
  were also built with slower technology.

- **Buy USB sticks from well-known brands, such as
  [[Kingston|https://www.kingston.com/en/usb-flash-drives]],
  [[Samsung|https://www.samsung.com/us/computing/memory-storage/usb-flash-drives/]],
  and [[SanDisk|https://www.sandisk.com/product-portfolio/usb-flash-drives]].**

  Generic brands are more likely to be slower and less reliable.

  Any modern USB stick from a well-known brand is fast enough to use Tails
  comfortably.

- **Buy your USB sticks from a reputable local store.**

  If you are in a place where counterfeit electronics are common, buy your USB
  stick from an international supermarket chain, which should have a more
  reliable supply chain.

  Avoid buying USB sticks online or using USB sticks that were given to you,
  because they could contain malware.

  <div class="attack">

  <p>In 2020, the [[FBI warned US companies to avoid USB sticks
  received by
  mail|https://www.cybereason.com/blog/fbi-warns-us-companies-to-avoid-malicious-usb-devices]]
  because some of them contained malicious software, such as [[!wikipedia
  BadUSB]].</p>

  </div>

- **Consider buying faster USB sticks that support USB version 3.0 or later.**

  Check the specifications of your computer to determine whether your USB ports
  support USB 3.0 or later. USB 3.0 ports are sometimes blue.

  USB 3.0 can be up to 10 times faster than USB 2.0. USB 2.0 has a maximum read
  speed of around 50 MB/s on USB sticks, while USB 3.0 has a maximum read speed
  of around 500 MB/s.

  Most quality USB sticks nowadays have read speeds of at least 100 MB/s and
  are faster when used on USB 3.0 ports. Some USB sticks advertised for USB 3.0
  have even greater speeds.

  You can test the write speed of your different USB sticks by comparing the
  time it takes to [[clone Tails|install/clone/pc]], for example.

### How many USB sticks should I buy?

If you want to store personal files and configuration in an encrypted
[[Persistent Storage|doc/persistent_storage]], we recommend that you buy 2 USB
sticks, ideally 3:

- 1 USB stick to be your **primary Tails**.

- 1 USB stick of the same size to be your **backup Tails**, if you use the
  Persistent Storage.

  We recommend that you [[create a backup Tails|doc/persistent_storage/backup]]
  by cloning your primary Tails, including its Persistent Storage.

- 1 USB stick to do [[manual upgrades|doc/upgrade]] on a few occasions when
  automatic upgrades are not available.

  This USB stick can be of a smaller size and worse quality.

  <!-- Fixing #16906 would remove the need for this 3rd USB stick. -->
