[[!meta title="Technical writer"]]
[[!meta robots="noindex"]]

Technical writers are responsible for the creation and maintenance of
our end-user documentation, including our support pages:

  - Fixing regressions or important bugs on our
    documentation. This includes tasks identified through:

    - User support on WhisperBack, XMPP, etc.

    - The work of technical writers themselves.

    - The Tails community in general.

  - Redacting [[release notes|contribute/how/documentation/release_notes]] based on the
    Changelog excerpts provided by RM.

  - Redacting exceptional publications on our
    blog (security advisory, etc.) or reviewing
    them.

  - Reviewing contributions to our documentation by paid workers or volunteer contributors
    For example, the [[Tails Team|foundations team]]
    sometimes writes known issues.

  - Maintaining a [[style guide|contribute/how/documentation/style_guide]] of Tails-related terms and usage to
    summarizes the terminology decision taken elsewhere.

  - Documenting new features, including the [[doc/about/features]] page.

  - Documenting known issues and their workarounds, for example, in the
    [[FAQ|support/faq]] and the
    [[known issues|support/known_issues]].

  - Keeping our documentation relevant and easy to navigate for the people
    reading them.

  - Maintaining our documentation on tools that are not part of Tails but
    that we instruct people to use, for example:

    * Testing, updating, and debugging *Rufus* and *balenaEtcher*

    * Testing the verification JavaScript on the download page at least once a
      year with Firefox Beta and Chrome Beta, unless it was already tested as
      part of the release process of a new version. ([[!tails_ticket 18224]])

On top of end-user documentation, technical writers can help with:

  - Improving the most important parts of the contributors
    documentation, for example, the pages that apply to all contributors,
    such as GitLab instructions.

  - Discussing UX copy with UX designers.

As technical writers have a limited amount of time to dedicate to these
tasks, Tails as a project should redefine priorities on a regular basis.
As general guidelines we should give priority to:

  - Tasks that have to be completed for a given version because
    documentation is a blocker for releasing.

  - Tasks that impact users the most or that impact the largest number of users.

  - Tasks that have the highest impact on sustainability.

These tasks are tracked using the
[[!tails_gitlab
tails/tails/-/boards/5?&label_name%5B%5D=Core+Work%3ATechnical+writing
desc="Core work: Technical writing"]]
label on GitLab.
