[[!meta title="Exchanging bitcoins using Electrum"]]

[[!toc levels=2]]

[*Electrum*](https://electrum.org/) is a [[!wikipedia Bitcoin]] client that is
particularly suited to the context of Tails because:

- You can use your wallet from different devices and avoid
  losing bitcoins in a backup mistake or computer failure.

- *Electrum* does not download the blockchain, so there is no waiting
  time when opening.

- You can sign transactions from an offline working session for
  additional security.

To open *Electrum*, choose
**Apps&nbsp;▸ Internet&nbsp;▸ Electrum Bitcoin Wallet**.

To learn how to use *Electrum*, read the
[*Electrum* documentation](https://electrum.readthedocs.io/).

For an explanation of how Bitcoin works in simple terms, read
[The In-Depth Guide to Bitcoin That Won’t Leave You
Frustrated](https://www.vpnmentor.com/blog/ultimate-guide-bitcoin/).

<div class="caution">

<p>Bitcoin is <a href="https://bitcoin.org/en/faq#is-bitcoin-anonymous">not
anonymous</a>.</p>

<p>To make it harder to relate your different transactions, you should use
a different receiving address for each transaction.
<i>Electrum</i> automatically generates new
addresses for you to use.</p>

</div>

<div class="tip">

<p><i>Electrum</i> uses <i>mBTC</i> as the
default base unit. 1 mBTC = 0.001 BTC. To change the base unit, choose
<b>Tools&nbsp;▸ Preferences</b>.</p>

</div>

<div class="caution">

<p>Do not blindly trust the bitcoin balance that <i>Electrum</i>
displays as <em>unconfirmed</em>. Wait for transactions to be confirmed.</p>

</div>

Recovering your wallet from its seed
====================================

Backing up your seed
--------------------

Your wallet can be recovered entirely from its <em>seed</em>: the
chain of words generated by *Electrum*
when creating the wallet. But if you lose your seed, you
lose your entire wallet.

That's why we recommend you both:

- Turn on the [[Electrum Bitcoin Wallet|persistent_storage/configure#electrum]]
  feature of the Persistent Storage
  to store your bitcoin wallet and preferences across separate working
  sessions.

- Backup your seed outside of Tails. For example, you can write it down
  on a piece of paper and keep it with you.

<a name="corrupted"></a>

Fixing a corrupted wallet
-------------------------

If *Electrum* fails to open or stays
minimized, maybe your *Electrum* folder
is corrupted.

To recover your wallet from its seed:

1. Make sure that *Electrum* is closed.

1. Open your *Home* folder in the *Files* browser.

1. Select the [[!img lib/go-down.png alt="View Options" class="symbolic" link="no"]]
   button in the title bar and select the option **Show Hidden Files**.

1. Open the *.electrum* folder.

1. Delete the *wallets* folder.

1. Open *Electrum*.

1. When creating a new wallet choose
   **I already have a seed**
   and specify the seed of your wallet.

Hardware wallets
================

You can use hardware wallets that work with Debian 13 (Trixie).

In the past, different wallets have worked with different versions of Debian.
For example, Trezor hardware wallets stopped working in Debian 12 (Bookworm),
so they don't work in Tails 6.0 or later.
