[[!meta title="Sharing files, websites, and chat rooms using OnionShare"]]

[*OnionShare*](https://onionshare.org/) allows you to create secure, anonymous,
and disposable services that other people can connect to.

To open *OnionShare*, choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Internet&nbsp;▸ OnionShare**.

From the welcome screen of *OnionShare*, you can choose between 4 different
services:

- Share files

- Receive files

- Host a website

- Chat anonymously

[[!img services.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

All these services are provided as Tor onion services and are only available
through the Tor network. You can share the address of these onion services with
other people to create temporary and anonymous communication channels.

People who know their onion addresses can connect to these services from *Tor
Browser*, either in Tails or outside of Tails.

<div class="tip">

<p>Unlike most Internet services, people using your <i>OnionShare</i> services
connect directly to your Tails over the Tor network. Your data is never shared
with or stored on any third-party server. Your Tails becomes a temporary and
anonymous server.</p>

</div>

These services become unavailable as soon as you close *OnionShare* or shut
down Tails.

<div class="bug">

<p><i>OnionShare</i> uses different onion addresses each time.</p>

<p>In the future, want to make it possible to store the onion addresses used by
<i>OnionShare</i> to the Persistent Storage. ([[!tails_ticket 20136]])</p>

</div>

Sharing files
=============

With the Share service of *OnionShare*:

- You select in *OnionShare* some files from your Tails that you want to share.

- People with the onion address can download these files from their *Tor
  Browser*.

[[!img share.png class="screenshot" alt="" size="719x"]]

<div class="note">

<p>Since Tails 6.0 (February 2024), the shortcut to share files via
<i>OnionShare</i> directly from the <i>Files</i> browser is not available
anymore.</p>

</div>

Receiving files
===============

With the Receive service of *OnionShare*:

- You specify in *OnionShare* a folder of your Tails in which you want to
  receive files.

- People with the onion address can upload files directly to this folder or
  send you text messages from their *Tor Browser*.

[[!img receive.png class="screenshot" alt="" size="719x"]]

Hosting a website
=================

With the Website service of *OnionShare*:

- You specify in *OnionShare* a folder that contains HTML pages in your Tails.

- People with the onion address can visit these HTML pages as a website from
  their *Tor Browser*.

[[!img website.png class="screenshot" alt="" size="719x"]]

Chatting anonymously
====================

With the Chat service of *OnionShare*:

- You start a chat room from *OnionShare*.

- People with the onion address can enter this chat room from their *Tor
  Browser* and chat with you or other people.

[[!img chat.png class="screenshot" alt="" size="719x"]]
