[[!meta title="Connecting to the Tor network"]]

[[!toc startlevel=2]]

Everything you do on the Internet from Tails goes through the Tor network.

Tor encrypts and anonymizes your connection by passing it through 3 relays. Tor
relays are servers operated by different people and organizations around the
world.

[[!img tor.png link="no" class="svg" alt="A Tor connection goes through 3 relays with the last one establishing the actual connection to the final destination"]]

<!--

To, hopefully, ease translations, this SVG embeds the font used in the
labels "Tor hides ...":

To update it:

1. Convert the TTF file SourceSansPro-Semibold.ttf to Base64 using:

   https://hellogreg.github.io/woff2base/

2. Copy it to a <style> tag in the <defs> tag of the SVG.

-->

You cannot access the Internet from Tails until you are connected to Tor. For
example, *Tor Browser* displays the error message `The proxy
server is refusing connections` until you are connected to Tor.

<div class="note">

<p>Because Tor routes your Internet traffic through 3 relays
before reaching its destination, the
connection is slower than when you are not using Tor.</p>

<p>See our documentation on
[[why Tor is slow|doc/anonymous_internet/tor/slow]].</p>

</div>

To connect to the Tor network:

1. [[Connect to a local network|networkmanager]], wired, Wi-Fi, or mobile.

2. The *Tor Connection* assistant appears to help you connect to the Tor network.

   [[!img tor-connection.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

3. Choose whether you want to:

   - Connect to Tor automatically

   - Hide to your local network that you are connecting to Tor

   The implications of both methods are detailed below.

<h2 id="bridges">Tor relays and bridges</h2>

- **Public Tor relays**

  Most of the time, your local network does not block access to the Tor network
  and you can use a public relay as your first Tor relay.

  Using a public Tor relay as your first Tor relay makes it clear to your local
  network that you are connecting to Tor, while still keeping your online
  activity secure and anonymous.

- **Tor bridges**

  Tor bridges are secret Tor relays that hide that you are connecting to Tor.

  Use a bridge as your first Tor relay if connecting to Tor is blocked or if
  using Tor could look suspicious to someone who monitors your Internet
  connection.

  The technology used by Tor bridges is designed to circumvent censorship
  where connections to Tor are blocked, for example in some countries with heavy censorship,
  by some public networks, or by some parental controls.

  It does so by camouflaging your connection so it cannot be recognized as a
  connection to Tor. As a consequence, the same technology can be used to hide
  that you are using Tor if it could look suspicious to someone who monitors
  your Internet connection.

  Tor bridges are often less reliable and slower than public Tor relays.

<h2 id="automatic">Connecting to Tor automatically</h2>

We recommend connecting to Tor automatically if you are on a public Wi-Fi
network or if many people in your country use Tor to circumvent censorship.

When you choose this option:

1. First, Tails synchronizes the clock of the computer automatically, because a
   correct time is needed to be able to connect to the Tor network.

   Tails learns the current time by connecting to the captive portal detection
   service of [Fedora](http://fedoraproject.org/static/hotspot.txt), which is used by most Linux
   distributions. This connection does not go through the Tor network and is an
   exception to our policy of only making Internet connections through the Tor
   network.

   <div class="next">

   <p>You can learn more about our security assessment of this time
   synchronization in our [[design documentation about non-Tor
   traffic|contribute/design/Tor_enforcement#non-tor-traffic]].</p>

   </div>

   If you choose instead to [[hide that you are connecting to Tor|tor#hiding]],
   you might have to fix the computer clock manually.

1. If Tails fails to synchronize the clock because you have to sign in to the
   network using a captive portal, an error screen is displayed that helps you
   do so.

   For detailed instructions, see how to [[sign in to the network using a
   captive portal|unsafe_browser]].

1. Then, Tails tries different ways of connecting to Tor
   until it succeeds:

   1. Tails tries to connect to Tor directly using **public relays**, without
      using a bridge.

   1. Tails tries to connect to Tor using one of the **default bridges**,
      already included in Tails, if connecting using public relays fails.

      <div class="note">

      <p>Tails uses the [[default <i>obfs4</i> bridges from <i>Tor
      Browser</i>|https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/applications/tor-browser-build/-/blob/main/projects/tor-expert-bundle/pt_config.json?ref_type=heads]].</p>

      </div>

   1. If public relays and default bridges don't work, Tails asks you to
      configure a **custom bridge**.

      See [[configuring a Tor bridge|tor#bridge]] below.

Someone monitoring your Internet connection could identify these attempts as
coming from a Tails user.

<h2 id="hiding">Hiding to your local network that you are connecting to Tor</h2>

You might need to go unnoticed if using Tor could look suspicious to someone
who monitors your Internet connection.

When you choose this option, Tails will only connect to Tor after you configure a custom Tor bridge. Bridges are
secret Tor relays that hide that you are connecting to Tor.

<div class="note">

<p>It is impossible to hide to the websites that you visit that you are using
Tor, because the <a href="https://metrics.torproject.org/exonerator.html">list
of exit nodes of the Tor network</a> is public.</p>

</div>

Our team is doing its best to help you connect to Tor using the most discreet
types of Tor bridges. That is why, when you decide to hide that you are connecting to Tor:

- Tails does not automatically detect whether you have to [[sign in to the
  network using a captive portal|unsafe_browser]].

- Default bridges are not available.

<h2 id="bridge">Configuring a Tor bridge</h2>

When *Tor Connection* fails to connect to Tor using public relays and default
bridges, select **Configure a Tor Bridge** from the error screen.

[[!img bridge.png class="screenshot" alt="Tor Connection: Configure a Tor bridge"]]

[[!inline pages="doc/anonymous_internet/tor/bridge.inline" raw="yes" sort="age"]]

To save the last Tor bridge that connected to Tor successfully, turn on the
[[Tor Bridge|persistent_storage/configure#bridge]] feature of the Persistent
Storage.

<h2 id="troubleshoot-tor">Troubleshooting connecting to Tor</h2>

<div class="next">

<p>See our documentation on [[troubleshooting connecting to Tor|tor/troubleshoot]].</p>

</div>

<h2 id="status">Viewing the status of Tor</h2>

The status of Tor appears as an onion icon in the
notification area:

  - [[!img lib/symbolic/tor-connected.png alt="Onion icon" link="no" class="symbolic"]]
    You are connected to Tor.

  - [[!img lib/symbolic/tor-disconnected.png alt="Onion icon that is crossed out" link="no" class="symbolic"]]
    You are not connected to Tor.

To view the list of Tor circuits that are used by your different applications,
click on the Tor status icon and choose **View Tor Circuits**. Learn more about
[[managing Tor circuits|circuits]].
