[[!meta title="Secure Boot certificates update"]]

[[!toc startlevel=2]]

If the **Secure Boot Update Needed** notification below appears
when starting Tails, it means that the Secure Boot certificates of this computer
need to be updated.

[[!img support/known_issues/secure_boot_certificates/secure_boot_update_needed.png class="screenshot" alt="Notification: Secure Boot Update Needed"]]

Otherwise, Tails will no longer start on this computer after a future Tails
upgrade. We cannot predict when such an upgrade will occur, because the timing
depends on changes that Tails could inherit from Debian in any Tails upgrade.

After this change in Tails occurs, the computer might display a **Secure Boot
Violation** error or another error message when trying to start Tails.

## Why is this happening?

[[!wikipedia Secure Boot]] is a security measure that prevents starting
malicious operating systems on a computer. Most computers running Windows have
Secure Boot enabled. Linux distributions, including Tails, also support Secure
Boot.

Since 2023, [[Microsoft has started
replacing|https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/topic/windows-secure-boot-certificate-expiration-and-ca-updates-7ff40d33-95dc-4c3c-8725-a9b95457578e]]
the Secure Boot certificates originally issued in 2011. These older certificates
begin expiring in June 2026.

Tails has detected that the computer still has outdated Secure Boot
certificates and needs an update.

## Updating the Secure Boot certificates

To update the Secure Boot certificates of the computer, restart its regular
operating system, Windows or Linux, and apply all available updates.

- For Windows, select **Start&nbsp;▸ Settings&nbsp;▸ Windows Update&nbsp;▸
  Check for Windows updates**.

  See also [[Microsoft: Install Windows
  updates|https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/install-windows-updates-3c5ae7fc-9fb6-9af1-1984-b5e0412c556a]].

- For Linux, such updates are applied by the [[!wikipedia fwupd]] daemon.

  Linux distributions that use the GNOME desktop automatically apply this
  update through GNOME Software.

## Disabling Secure Boot

If the **Secure Boot Update Needed** notification persists when
restarting Tails, it means that the Secure Boot certificates of the computer are
still outdated.

Instead of updating the certificate, you can also disable Secure Boot. Even with
Secure Boot disabled, the regular operating system should still start.

You can usually disable Secure Boot through the BIOS settings of the computer,
but the procedure varies by manufacturer. To learn how to edit the BIOS
settings, search for the user manual of the computer on the support website of
the manufacturer.

In the BIOS menu, find the **Secure Boot** setting and disable it. This option
is usually in either the **Security** tab, the **Boot** tab, or the
**Authentication** tab.
