[[!meta robots="noindex"]]

<h1 id="install" class="step pc-clone mac-clone">Install Tails by cloning</h1>
<h1 id="upgrade" class="step upgrade">Upgrade your primary Tails by cloning</h1>

<div class="step-image">
[[!img install/inc/infography/clone-tails.png link="no" class="clone upgrade-tails upgrade-os" alt=""]]
</div>

<p class="upgrade">
  In this step, you will upgrade your primary Tails from the
  <span class="upgrade-clone">other</span>
  <span class="upgrade-tails upgrade-os">intermediary</span>
  Tails using
  <i>Tails Cloner</i>.
</p>

1. Plug
   <span class="pc-clone mac-clone">the new</span>
   <span class="upgrade">your primary Tails</span>
   USB stick <span class="upgrade">in addition to the
     <span class="upgrade-clone">other</span>
     <span class="upgrade-tails upgrade-os">intermediary</span>
   Tails</span> into the computer.

   <div class="caution pc-clone mac-clone">

   <p>All the data on this USB stick will be lost.</p>

   <p>Some data might still be recovered using advanced forensics tools.</p>

   </div>

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Tails&nbsp;▸ Tails Cloner** to open *Tails Cloner*.

   [[!img install/inc/screenshots/tails_cloner.png class="pc-clone mac-clone screenshot" alt="Tails Cloner: 'Clone the current Tails'"]]
   [[!img install/inc/screenshots/tails_cloner_upgrade.png class="upgrade screenshot" alt="Tails Cloner: 'Clone the current Tails'"]]

   <p class="clone upgrade-clone">If the other Tails has a Persistent Storage, another
   option <b>Clone the current Persistent Storage</b> is available.</p>

   <p class="clone upgrade-clone">[[!img install/inc/screenshots/tails_cloner_persistent_storage.png class="screenshot" alt="Option: **Clone the current Persistent Storage** below **Clone the current Tails**"]]</p>

   <p class="clone upgrade-clone"></p>

   <div class="clone upgrade-clone">

   <p>If you select the option <b>Clone the current Persistent Storage</b>, the
   Persistent Storage of the other Tails is also be copied.
   <span class="upgrade-clone">The <b>Upgrade</b> button becomes unavailable
   and you can only [[reinstall|install/clone]] and delete all data on the
   target USB stick.</span></p>

   <div class="bug upgrade-clone">

   <p>In the future, we want to allow cloning the Persistent Storage when
   upgrading as well, for example to make it quicker to update a [[backup Tails
   USB stick|doc/persistent_storage/backup]]. ([[!tails_ticket 20362]])</p>

   </div>

   </div>

1. Choose
   <span class="pc-clone mac-clone">the new</span>
   <span class="upgrade">your</span>
   USB stick in the **Target USB stick** menu.

1. To start the
   <span class="pc-clone mac-clone">installation, click on the <b>Install</b> button.</span>
   <span class="upgrade">upgrade, click on the <b>Upgrade</b> button.</span>

   <div class="pc-clone mac-clone">

   <p>Read the warning message in the confirmation dialog.</p>

   <p>Click <b>Delete All Data and Install</b> to confirm.</p>

   </div>

1. The
   <span class="pc-clone mac-clone">installation</span>
   <span class="upgrade">upgrade</span>
   takes a few minutes.

   <div class="bug">
   <p>The progress bar usually freezes for some time
   while synchronizing data on disk.</p>
   </div>

1. After the
   <span class="pc-clone mac-clone">installation</span>
   <span class="upgrade">upgrade</span>
   finishes, close <i>Tails Cloner</i>

   [[!img install/inc/screenshots/installation_complete.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

<div class="upgrade">

<div class="success">

<video autoplay loop muted width="200" height="200" poster="https://tails.net/install/inc/success/start.png">
  <source src="https://tails.net/install/inc/success/start.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
</video>

<div>
  <p class="big">You made it!</p>

  <p>You are done upgrading Tails. You can now restart on your primary Tails USB stick.</p>

  <p>Congratulations on staying safe :)</p>

  <p>Read the [[release notes|latest]] of Tails [[!inline pages="inc/stable_amd64_version" raw="yes" sort="age"]] to see what's new.</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>
