[[!meta title="Known issues"]]

- To learn what you can do with Tails, refer to our [[documentation|doc]].

- For more general questions about Tails, refer to our [[FAQ|support/faq]].

- For issues with graphics cards, see our [[known issues with graphics cards|known_issues/graphics]].

[[!toc levels=2]]

<h1 id="not-at-all">Tails not starting at all</h1>

<h2 id="mac-not-at-all">Mac</h2>

This section lists known problems with specific hardware.

Tails does not start at all on Mac models that use the Apple chips (M1, M2, and so on) and on
many other Mac models.

Apple does not prioritize collaborating with Free Software projects. Their
newest hardware is usually very hard for Free Software developers to get
working with Linux, and thus Tails. PC hardware tends to be more open and work
better with Linux.

<div class="tip">

<p>See our instructions on [[starting Tails on Mac|doc/first_steps/start/mac]]
for general troubleshooting tips.</p>

<p>[[Let us know|support/talk]] if you discover a new issue or workaround.</p>

</div>

<h2 id="pc-not-at-all">PC</h2>

This section lists known problems with specific hardware.

<div class="tip">

<p>See our instructions on [[starting Tails on PC|doc/first_steps/start/pc]]
for general troubleshooting tips.</p>

<p>[[Let us know|support/talk]] if you discover a new issue or workaround.</p>

</div>

<h3 id="dell-latitude-e5250">Dell Latitude E5250</h3>

<!--
Last updated: 2019-04-05
-->

Does not start on Tails USB sticks.

<h3 id="dell-latitude-e6430">Dell Latitude E6430 and E6230</h3>

<!--
Last updated: 2018-06-14 (wb://7653aff4f415e996567233d8c088da08)
-->

Does not start on USB sticks.

With BIOS versions A03 06/03/2012 (and A09, A11, and A12)

Error message: `Invalid partition table!`

Workaround (at least with BIOS versions A09, A11, and A12): just hit enter
and it will continue with the boot.

<h3 id="hp-notebook-BCM943142HM">HP Notebook BCM943142HM</h3>

<!--
Last updated: 2020-12-18
-->

Does not start Tails 4.13.

<h3 id="system76-oryx-pro">System76 Oryx Pro</h3>

<!--
Last updated: 2019-05-02
Specs: https://system76.com/laptops/oryx
-->

This machine does not start from a Tails USB stick: the Linux kernel
included in at least Tails 3.11 to 3.13.1, inclusive, does not support
the hardware USB controller.

<h1 id="not-entirely">Tails not starting entirely</h1>

<h2 id="mac-not-entirely">Mac</h2>

This section lists known problems with specific hardware.

<div class="tip">

<p>See our instructions on [[starting Tails on Mac|doc/first_steps/start/mac#not-entirely]]
for general troubleshooting tips.</p>

<p>[[Let us know|support/talk]] if you discover a new issue or workaround.</p>

</div>

<!--
Last updated:
- MacBook Air Retina 2019: 2019-11-01
- MacBook Pro 8,3: 2019-11-01
-->

### MacBook Air Retina 2018 and 2019

To start Tails successfully, [[add the following boot option when
starting Tails|doc/advanced_topics/boot_options]]:

    modprobe.blacklist=thunderbolt

Still, the trackpad and keyboard might not work. You can use an external
mouse and keyboard.

<h2 id="pc-not-entirely">PC</h2>

This section lists known problems with specific hardware.

<div class="tip">

<p>See our instructions on [[starting Tails on PC|doc/first_steps/start/pc#not-entirely]]
for general troubleshooting tips.</p>

<p>[[Let us know|support/talk]] if you discover a new issue or workaround.</p>

</div>

<h3 id="lockup">"Soft lockup" error</h3>

<!--
Last updated: 2019-05-20
-->

On some laptops, Tails starts with the following error:

<p class="code">soft lockup - CPU#<span class="command-placeholder">N</span> stuck for <span class="command-placeholder">N</span>s</p>

To start Tails successfully, try to [[add the following boot option when starting
Tails|doc/advanced_topics/boot_options]]:

    acpi_rev_override=1

<h3 id="microsoft-surface-laptop">Microsoft Surface Laptop 3 and 4</h3>

<!--
Last updated: 2022-09-12
-->

The keyboard and mouse do not work on this laptop.
If you find a workaround, please let us know.

<h2 id="sbat">Shim SBAT verification error</h2>

This section applies if you get the following error message, either when
starting Tails or when restarting your regular Linux operating system after
starting Tails.

<p class="code">
Verifying shim SBAT data failed: Security Policy Violation<br>
Something has gone seriously wrong: SBAT self-check failed: Security Policy Violation
</p>

- If you get this error message when starting Tails, then do a [[manual
  upgrade|doc/upgrade#manual]] of your Tails USB to Tails 6.7 or later.

- If you get this error message when starting your regular Linux operating
  system, then it means that your Linux operating system is outdated.

  1. Edit your UEFI settings to disable Secure Boot.

     With Secure Boot disabled, your regular Linux operating system should
     start again.

     To learn how to edit the BIOS or UEFI settings, search for the user manual
     of the computer on the support website of the manufacturer.

  1. Update your regular Linux operating system.

  1. Try to enable Secure Boot again in your UEFI settings.

     If your regular Linux operating system still doesn't start, then disable
     Secure Boot again. You can try to enable Secure Boot again in the future.

     It might take several months for your Linux distribution to provide updates
     before you can enable Secure Boot again.


<h1 id="wifi">Networking issues</h1>

<h2 id="problematic-wifi">Problematic Wi-Fi interfaces</h2>

Check in this section
if there is a workaround to get your Wi-Fi interface work in Tails.

To know the model of your Wi-Fi interface:

1. Open a *Console* and execute the following command.

       lspci -v | grep "Network controller"

<h3 id="88w8897">88W8897 [AVASTAR] 802.11ac Wireless</h3>

<!--
Last updated: 2018-09-19
-->

On some computers with a Marvell Avastar 88W8897 Wi-Fi adapter, such
as some Microsoft Surface Pro models, Tails fails to connect to
Wi-Fi networks.

If you experience this problem, you can try to [[disable MAC address
anonymization|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/mac_spoofing]] that sometimes
fixes it.

<h3 id="rtl8723be">RTL8723BE PCIe Wireless Network Adapter</h3>

<!--
Last updated: 2017-12-24
-->

On some computers with a RTL8723be Wi-Fi adapter, Tails might fail to discover
Wi-Fi networks, provide unreliable Wi-Fi connections, or have poor Wi-Fi
performance.

You can try to [[add the following boot options when starting
Tails|doc/advanced_topics/boot_options]] until you find a
combination that works for you. The exact combination of options that works
depends on the computer:

- <span class="command">rtl8723be.fwlps=0 rtl8723be.ips=0</span>

- <span class="command">rtl8723be.ant_sel=1</span>

- <span class="command">rtl8723be.ant_sel=2</span>

- <span class="command">rtl8723be.ant_sel=1 rtl8723be.fwlps=0 rtl8723be.ips=0</span>

- <span class="command">rtl8723be.ant_sel=2 rtl8723be.fwlps=0 rtl8723be.ips=0</span>

<h3 id="broadcom-sta-dkms">Broadcom Wi-Fi network interface needing <code>broadcom-sta-dkms</code></h3>

<!--
Last updated: 2019-01-29
-->

Some Broadcom Wi-Fi interfaces require the
[`wl`](https://wiki.debian.org/wl) driver, provided by the
`broadcom-sta-dkms` Debian package, to work in Tails.

The `wl` driver is not included in Tails because it is proprietary.

Your device requires the `wl` driver if it is in the list of devices
supported by the `broadcom-sta-dkms` package on the corresponding
[Debian wiki page](https://wiki.debian.org/wl). If you find your device
in the list of supported devices, then it is impossible to use your
Wi-Fi card in Tails.

<h3 id="broadcom-43602">Authentication issues with Broadcom 43602</h3>

<!--
Last updated: 2024-03-28
-->

The Broadcom 43602 Wi-Fi interface asks for the password of Wi-Fi networks in a
loop when trying to connect.

To fix this, try the following, if you have an iPhone:

1. Start Tails.

1. Set up a personal Wi-Fi hotspot from your iPhone with the **Maximize
   Compatibility** option turned on.

1. Connect to your personal Wi-Fi hotspot from Tails.

1. Disconnect.

1. Connect to any other Wi-Fi network.

<h3 id="lenovo-legion-y530">Lenovo Legion Y530</h3>

<!--
Last updated: 2019-05-10
-->

Wi-Fi adapter does not work.

To fix this issue, [[add the following boot option when
starting Tails|doc/advanced_topics/boot_options]]:

    modprobe.blacklist=ideapad_laptop

<!--

<h1 id="security-issues">Security issues</h1>

Note: If we enable again this section in the future, we should link to
it from /doc/anonymous_internet/Tor_Browser#fingerprint.

<a id="fingerprint"></a>

Browser fingerprint
===================

There are known differences between the fingerprints of
*Tor Browser* inside and outside of Tails:

For more detail, see our documentation about the [[fingerprint of *Tor Browser*
in Tails|doc/anonymous_internet/Tor_Browser#fingerprint]].

-->

<h1 id="hardware">Other hardware issues</h1>

<h2 id="touchpad-configurations">Touchpad configurations</h2>

<h3 id="lenovo-ideapad-3-touchpad">Lenovo IdeaPad 3 Touchpad</h3>

<!--
Last updated: 2021-03-26
-->

This touchpad does not work by default. To fix this problem, [[add the
following boot option when starting
Tails|doc/advanced_topics/boot_options]]:

    pci=nocrs

<h2 id="lenovo-thinkpad-11e">Lenovo ThinkPad 11e</h2>

<!--
Last updated: 2018-03-22
Specs: https://www.cnet.com/products/lenovo-thinkpad-11e/specs/
-->

Tails might be unstable and stop working regularly on some Lenovo
ThinkPad 11e laptops, such as the 2015 model.

To fix this problem, [[add the following boot option when
starting Tails|doc/advanced_topics/boot_options]]:

    intel_idle.max_cstate=1

<h2 id="usb-gigabyte">USB devices are not working on some <a href="https://www.gigabyte.com/">GIGABYTE</a> motherboards</h2>

<!--
Last updated: 2019-06-02
-->

To workaround this issue, you can try to:

- Use other USB ports. For example, use USB 2 ports instead of USB 3
  ports and vice versa.

- Enable these 3 options in the BIOS

  - xHCI handoff
  - EHCI handoff
  - IOMMU controller

- [[Add the following boot option when
  starting Tails|doc/advanced_topics/boot_options]]:

      amd_iommu=on iommu=pt

- Disable IOMMU in the BIOS then enable it again.

Some of these workarounds might disable some of the USB ports.

<h2 id="graphics-corruption-tor-browser">Graphics corruption in Tor Browser and Thunderbird</h2>

<!--
Last updated: 2020-02-22
-->

On some computers, _Tor Browser_ and _Thunderbird_ are displayed incorrectly:

- The application window is initially empty and white.

- The icons and menus only appear when hovered by the mouse.

- The contents of the window is only displayed in stripes when scrolling.

To workaround this issue, [[add the following boot option when
starting Tails|doc/advanced_topics/boot_options]]:

    intel_iommu=off

This problem affects at least the following computers:

- MacBookPro11,5

- Other MacBooks with a Radeon R9 graphics adapter

<h2 id="acer-swift-3">Acer Swift 3</h3>

<!--
Last updated: 2020-05-30
-->

In order to allow Tails to use all available memory,
start Tails from the *F2 EFI setup* firmware entry.

<h2 id="dell-xps-15-7590-nvidia">Dell XPS 15 7590 with Nvidia graphics card</h3>

<!--
Last updated: 2023-07-07
Debian bug: https://bugs.debian.org/1036530
-->

When using the Nvidia card of a Dell XPS 15 7590 laptop,
the system may become unresponsive while using Tails.

To fix this, start Tails with the following [[boot
option|doc/advanced_topics/boot_options]]:

    pcie_port_pm=off

<h1 id="misc">Other issues</h1>

<h2 id="video-memory">Tails does not erase video memory</h2>

Tails doesn't erase the [[!wikipedia Video_random-access_memory desc="video memory"]].

When you restart your computer after using Tails, it might briefly display the
last screen that was displayed in Tails.

If you shut down your computer instead of restarting it, the video memory will
erase itself automatically after some time.

See [[!tails_ticket 5356 desc="Erase video memory on shutdown"]].
