
You can use *obfs4* and *WebTunnel* bridges in Tails right now.

To configure a Tor bridge in *Tor Connection*, you can either:

- **Ask for a bridge based on your region**

  This option is the easiest as it allows you to learn about bridges directly
  from Tails.

  Tails downloads information about bridges that are most likely to work in
  your region from the [[Moat
  API|https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/anti-censorship/rdsys/-/blob/main/doc/moat.md]]
  of the Tor Project. To circumvent censorship, this connection is disguised as
  a connection to another website using [[!wikipedia domain fronting]].

  If you choose *Automatic* as region, the country of your IP address is used.

- **Ask for a bridge by email**

  You can send an empty email to
  <a href="mailto:bridges@torproject.org">bridges@torproject.org</a> from a
  Gmail or Riseup email address.

  Sending the email reveals to Gmail or Riseup that you are trying to
  connect to Tor but not to someone who monitors your Internet connection.

- **Enter a bridge that you already know**

  1. Before starting Tails, learn about bridges by either:

     * Visiting <https://bridges.torproject.org/options>.

       We recommend that you visit this page from a different local network if
       accessing this page is blocked or if you want to hide that you are
       connecting to Tor.

     * Sending a message to
       [[@GetBridgesBot|https://support.torproject.org/tor-browser/circumvention/getting-bridges/#telegram-bot]]
       from [[*Telegram*|https://telegram.org/]].

  1. Store the bridge lines in a text document on separate USB stick for later
     use in Tails.

  1. After you started Tails, copy one of the bridge lines from this other
     USB stick into *Tor Connection*.

Even someone who knows your bridge cannot know what you are doing online from
Tails.
