[[!meta title="Troubleshooting connecting to Tor"]]

The sections below summarize the most common problems when [[connecting to Tor|tor]].

[[!toc startlevel=2]]

<h2 id="clock">The computer clock is set to an incorrect time zone</h2>

The clock of the computer needs to be correct to connect to Tor.

If you choose to [[hide that you are connecting to Tor|tor#hiding]], you might
have to fix the clock manually if Tails fails to connect to Tor.

Choose **Fix Clock** in the error screen of the *Tor Connection* assistant to
set the clock and time zone of your computer.

If you have problems fixing the clock, you can instead try to restart Tails and
choose to [[connect to Tor automatically|tor#automatic]]. When connecting to
Tor automatically, Tails fixes the clock automatically by connecting to the
captive portal detection service of [Fedora](http://fedoraproject.org/static/hotspot.txt) before
connecting to Tor.

<h2 id="portal">You need to sign in to the network</h2>

[[!inline pages="doc/anonymous_internet/unsafe_browser/captive_portal.inline" raw="yes" sort="age"]]

To sign in to a network using a captive portal:

1. In the error screen of the *Tor Connection* assistant, choose **Try Signing in to the Network**.

1. Wait until the *Unsafe Browser* starts.

1. Follow the instructions on the home page of the *Unsafe Browser*.

<h2 id="bridge">You need to configure a Tor bridge</h2>

[[!inline pages="doc/anonymous_internet/tor/bridge.inline" raw="yes" sort="age"]]

<h2 id="stuck">The progress bar gets stuck around 50%</h2>

When using a custom Tor *obfs4* bridge, the progress bar of *Tor Connection*
sometimes gets stuck halfway through and becomes extremely slow.

[[!img stuck.png link="no" alt=""]]

To fix this, you can either:

- Close and reopen *Tor Connection* to speed up the initial connection.

- Try with [[another bridge|troubleshoot#bridge]].

<div class="bug">

<!--

On 2025-09-04, the Anticensorship Team believed that there were still many
bridges with an obfs4 version earlier than 0.0.12.

Their "transport-info" info in cached-extrainfo is too new to give us reliable
information.

-->

<p>This issue only affects outdated <i>obfs4</i> bridges and does not happen with
<i>obfs4</i> bridges that run version 0.0.12 or later.</p>

</div>

<h2 id="broken">The bridge is no longer operational</h2>

It is possible that the bridge that you entered is no longer working.

Try with [[another bridge|troubleshoot#bridge]].

<h2 id="incorrect">You did not enter the bridge correctly</h2>

You can use *obfs4* and *WebTunnel* bridges in Tails right now.

- An *obfs4* bridge looks like:

      obfs4 1.2.3.4:1234 B0E566C9031657EA7ED3FC9D248E8AC4F37635A4 cert=OYWq67L7MDApdJCctUAF7rX8LHvMxvIBPHOoAp0+YXzlQdsxhw6EapaMNwbbGICkpY8CPQ iat-mode=0

- A *WebTunnel* bridge looks like:

      webtunnel [1234:567:890a:bcde:f123:4567:890a:bcde]:443 5F55B60FF2AEA996B5109BC338FC5F2BCA696F52 url=https://example.com/webtunnel ver=0.0.1

You need to enter the entire line, not just the IP address and port
combination.
