[[!meta title="Installing additional software"]]

[[!toc levels=2]]

Which additional software can I install in Tails?
=================================================

Tails includes a [[limited set of applications|doc/about/features]] but
you can install more software.

This software is distributed in packages that are made available from the Debian repositories,
which are similar to an app store.

To know which packages are available in Debian:

- Browse locally with
  the *Synaptic Package Manager*:

  1. When starting Tails, [[set up an administration password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

  1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ System Tools&nbsp;▸ Synaptic Package Manager**.

  1. Wait until *Synaptic* finishes downloading new package information
     from the Debian servers.

  1. You can:

     - Browse the packages by sections from the left sidebar.

     - Search on titles and descriptions of packages with the **Search** button.

- Search the Internet for alternatives to other software.

  For example: "*debian alternatives to photoshop*".

- Ask a friend who is knowledgeable about Linux.

- Search the [Debian website](https://www.debian.org/distrib/packages#search_packages).

<a id="warning"></a>

Be careful about what you install
---------------------------------

<div class="caution">

<p>The packages included in Tails are carefully tested for security.
Installing additional packages might break the security built into Tails. For
example, installing OpenVPN might modify the firewall rules that Tails uses to
force network traffic to go through Tor.</p>

</div>

If you are unsure:

- Packages that use the network need to be configured to go through
  Tor. They are otherwise blocked from accessing the network.

- Some software might, for example, modify the firewall and break the security
  built into Tails. But other software like games or office tools are probably fine.

- Software not [[officially included in Tails|doc/about/features]] might have not been tested for security.
  We also cannot provide support or documentation for it.

- Only applications that are packaged for Debian can be installed and they are
  under [[public scrutiny|doc/about/trust#trust_debian]].

Examples of additional useful software
======================================

- [*VLC*](https://www.videolan.org/vlc/), a multimedia player with advanced
  features.

- [*Pitivi*](https://www.pitivi.org/), a video editor.

- [*Scribus*](https://www.scribus.net/), a page layout application.

- [*GNOME Camera*](https://apps.gnome.org/Snapshot/), from the `gnome-snapshot` package, an application
  to take pictures and videos from your webcam.

- [*Mumble*](https://www.mumble.info/), a voice chat application.

- [*Calibre*](https://calibre-ebook.com/), an EPUB reader and library manager.

- [*GtkHash*](https://gtkhash.org/), a utility to calculate the checksum of files.

<a id="language-packages"></a>

Language packages and dictionaries
----------------------------------

Replace <span class="command-placeholder">lang</span> with the code for your
language. For example, `vi` for Vietnamese.

Tails already includes language packages and dictionaries for Arabic,
German, Spanish, Farsi, French, Hindi, Bahasa Indonesia, Italian,
Portuguese, Russian, Turkish, and Simplified Chinese.

- *LibreOffice* language package: <code>libreoffice-l10n-<span class="command-placeholder">lang</span></code>

  [List of available *LibreOffice* language packages](https://packages.debian.org/search?keywords=libreoffice-l10n&searchon=names&suite=stable&section=all)

- *Thunderbird* language package: <code>thunderbird-l10n-<span class="command-placeholder">lang</span></code>

  [List of available *Thunderbird* language packages](https://packages.debian.org/search?keywords=thunderbird-l10n&searchon=names&suite=stable&section=all)

- *Hunspell* dictionary: <code>hunspell-<span class="command-placeholder">lang</span></code>

  The *Hunspell* dictionaries are used for spell-checking by *Tor Browser*,
  *LibreOffice*, *Thunderbird*, and many other applications.

  [List of available *Hunspell* dictionaries](https://packages.debian.org/search?keywords=hunspell&searchon=names&suite=stable&section=all)

Installing additional software
==============================

To install a package using *Synaptic*:

1. When starting Tails, [[set up an administration password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ System Tools&nbsp;▸ Synaptic Package Manager**.

1. Click **Search** and search for the name of the package.

1. Right-click (on Mac, click with two fingers) on the name of the package in the search results and
   choose **Mark for Installation**.

1. *Synaptic* calculates the additional changes for your package to work. Click **Mark** to confirm those changes.

1. Click **Apply** to download, install, and
   configure the package.

<div class="tip">

<p>If you are comfortable with the command line, you can use <code>apt</code> instead.</p>

</div>

Installing additional software automatically when starting Tails
----------------------------------------------------------------

To install an additional package automatically when starting Tails:

1. Turn on the [[Additional
   Software|persistent_storage/configure#additional_software]] feature of the
   Persistent Storage.

1. Install the package using *Synaptic* or
   the `apt` command.

1. After the package is installed,
   a notification appears to ask if you want to install this package
   every time you start Tails in the future.

   [[!img add.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

   - If you choose **Install Every Time**,
     the package is saved in the Persistent Storage and will be reinstalled
     automatically every time you start Tails.

     The package will also be updated automatically when you connect to the
     Internet.

   - If you choose **Install Only Once**, the
     package is also saved in the Persistent Storage but won't be
     reinstalled automatically every time you start Tails.

The same package can be reinstalled faster for some time because you
won't have to download it again.

Using additional software
=========================

Once installed, applications that don't use the network usually work
out of the box.
However, Tails has some differences in terms of
additional configuration and network access.

Additional configuration
------------------------

To save the configuration of additional software across different Tails
sessions, you can use the [[Dotfiles|persistent_storage/configure#dotfiles]]
feature of the Persistent Storage.

Each application handles its configuration very differently, so we cannot give
general instructions on which files have to be saved using the Dotfiles
features.

Network access
--------------

Tails only allows connections to the Tor network. Additional software that uses
the Internet must be configured to go through the Tor network otherwise, their
connections are blocked by default for security.

To make an application use the Tor network, you can either:

- Configure the application to use Tor as a proxy with the following parameters:

  * Type: SOCKS5
  * Host: 127.0.0.1
  * Port: 9050

  For example, to use *Mumble* in Tails, you can configure Tor as proxy in the
  network configuration of *Mumble*:

  [[!img mumble.png class="screenshot" alt="Network configuration of Mumble with proxy settings"]]

- Open the application using `torsocks` on the command line.

  Execute the following command in a *Console*. Replace
  <span class="command-placeholder">application</span> with the command line
  of the application that you want to open.

  <p class="command-template">torsocks <span class="command-placeholder">application</span></p>

  For example, to use *Mumble* in Tails, you can also execute the following
  command:

  <p class="command">torsocks mumble</p>

### Technical networking considerations

- Only TCP connections can go through the Tor network.

- UDP connections, for example in many VoIP applications, and ICMP connections,
  for example in the `ping` utility, cannot go through the Tor network and are
  blocked in Tails.

- DNS requests go through the Tor network if the application uses the system
  configuration otherwise, DNS requests will fail to resolve.

- IPv6 connections are blocked in Tails.

- The default Tor port in Tails (9050) forces the use of different Tor circuits
  for each different destination IP and port, also called "*stream isolation*".

Checking your list of additional software
=========================================

To see which packages are installed automatically every time you start Tails,
choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ System Tools&nbsp;▸ Additional Software**.

Click the **[[!img lib/window-close.png class="symbolic" link="no" alt=""]]**
button to remove a package from the list.

The same list is also available from the Persistent Storage settings, by clicking on the
[[!img lib/emblem-system.png class="symbolic" link="no"]] button of the **Additional Software** feature.

Removing additional software
============================

When you installed the package, if you chose:

- **Install Only Once**, you can remove it by restarting Tails.

- **Install Every Time**, you can remove it either:

  - Using *Additional Software*:

    1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ System Tools&nbsp;▸ Additional Software**.

    1. Click the **[[!img lib/window-close.png class="symbolic" link="no" alt=""]]**
       to the right of the name of the package.

  - Using *Synaptic*:

    1. When starting Tails, [[set up an administration password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

    1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ System Tools&nbsp;▸ Synaptic Package Manager**.

    1. Click **Search** and search for the name of the package.

    1. Right-click (on Mac, click with two fingers) on the name of the package in the search results and choose
       **Mark for Removal**.

    1. Click **Apply** to remove the package.

  - From the command line using `apt`.

  After the package is removed, a notification appears to ask if you want to
  remove this package from your list of additional software.

  [[!img remove.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

Freeing space in your Persistent Storage
----------------------------------------

After you installed many packages that you are not using anymore, you can free some space in your Persistent Storage:

1. When starting Tails, [[set up an administration password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ System Tools&nbsp;▸ Console**.

1. Execute the following command.

   <p class="command">sudo apt clean</p>

Configuring additional APT repositories  (for advanced users)
=============================================================

<div class="caution">

<p>The packages available in Debian are
submitted to public scrutiny.</p>

<p>Configuring additional APT repositories might break the security built into
Tails and might install software that has not even been approved by Debian. Be even more careful
with what you install.</p>

<p>This step is usually not needed to install additional software and might be necessary
only in very rare occasions.</p>

</div>

Sometimes, you might need to configure additional APT repositories. For
example, to install packages from the `non-free` section of Debian. To do so:

1. When starting Tails, [[set up an administration password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

1. Create an *apt-sources.list.d* folder in your
   Persistent Storage:

   <p class="command">sudo install -d -m 755 /live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/apt-sources.list.d</p>

1. As root, edit */live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/persistence.conf*,
   the configuration of the Persistent Storage, and add the
   *apt-sources.list.d* folder as a
   feature of type `link`:

       /etc/apt/sources.list.d	source=apt-sources.list.d,link

1. Write your additional `sources.list` files in the
   *apt-sources.list.d* folder.

   For example, to add
   the `non-free` sections of Debian 13 (Trixie), backports, and security
   updates, you can create a file named
   */live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/apt-sources.list.d/non-free.list*
   with the following content:

       deb tor+http://ftp.us.debian.org/debian/ trixie non-free
       deb tor+http://security.debian.org/ trixie-security non-free
       deb tor+http://ftp.us.debian.org/debian/ trixie-updates non-free
       deb tor+http://ftp.us.debian.org/debian/ trixie-backports non-free

   File names must end with *.list* and must only contain the following
   characters: letters, digits, underscore, hyphen, and period.

1. Correct the ownership and permissions of your additional `sources.list`
   files to be owned by `root` and only readable by others. For
   example, execute the following commands.

   <p class="command">sudo chown root:root /live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/apt-sources.list.d/non-free.list</p>

   <p class="command">sudo chmod 644 /live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/apt-sources.list.d/non-free.list</p>

1. Restart Tails to apply the changes.
