[[!meta title="Making a backup of your Persistent Storage"]]

<!-- XXX: These instructions should be kept in sync with recover.mdwn -->

<div class="tip">

<p>If your Tails is broken and you are trying to recover your Persistent Storage,
see [[recovering the Persistent Storage of a broken Tails|recover]] instead.</p>

</div>

[[!toc]]

<h1 id="creating">Creating a backup Tails USB stick using <i>Tails Cloner</i></h1>

We recommend you to create another Tails to store
your backup by cloning from your current Tails. This way, if your Tails is lost or damaged, you can
replace it immediately with your backup Tails.

1. Start on the Tails USB stick that you want to back up and clone *from*.

1. When starting Tails, unlock your Persistent Storage.

1. Plug in the new USB stick on which you want to create your backup Tails USB
   stick and clone *to*.

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Tails&nbsp;▸ Tails Cloner**.

1. Turn on the option **Clone the current Persistent Storage** below the
   option **Clone the current Tails**.

   [[!img clone.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

1. Make sure that the new USB stick is selected in the **Target USB stick**
   menu.

1. To start the cloning, click on the **Install** button.

1. Read the warning message in the confirmation dialog.

1. Enter a passphrase for the Persistent Storage on the new USB stick in the
   **Passphrase** text box.

1. Enter the same passphrase again in the **Confirm** text box.

1. Click **Continue**.

1. Click **Delete All Data and Install** to confirm.

   Cloning takes a few minutes.

   <div class="bug">

   <p>The progress bar usually freezes for some time
   while synchronizing data on disk.</p>

   </div>

<h1 id="updating">Updating your backup Tails using the <i>Back Up Persistent Storage</i> utility</h1>

1. Start on your current Tails.

1. When starting Tails, unlock your Persistent Storage.

1. Plug in your backup Tails USB stick.

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ System Tools&nbsp;▸ Back Up Persistent Storage**.

   <div class="note">

   <p>Each time you update your backup, only the files that have changed
   are copied.</p>

   </div>

1. If your backup Tails has an outdated version of Tails, we recommend you upgrade it by cloning your
   current Tails using *Tails Cloner*.
   For detailed instructions, see how to [[manually upgrade from another
   Tails|upgrade/clone#upgrade]].

<h1 id="console">Updating your backup Tails from a <i>Console</i></h1>

If you prefer updating your backup Tails from a *Console*:

1. Start on your current Tails.

1. When starting Tails, [[set up an administration password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Accessories&nbsp;▸ Files** to open the *Files* browser.

1. Plug in your backup Tails USB stick.

   A new encrypted volume appears in the sidebar of the
   *Files* browser. Click on it and enter the
   passphrase of your backup Tails to unlock the volume.

1. Execute the following command in a *Console*.

   <p class="command">sudo rsync -PaSHAXv --del /live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/ /media/amnesia/TailsData</p>

   When the command finishes, it displays a summary of the data that was
   copied. For example:

       sent 32.32M bytes  received 1.69K bytes  21.55M bytes/sec
       total size is 32.30M  speedup is 1.00
