[[!meta title="Configuring the Persistent Storage"]]

To configure the Persistent Storage, choose
**Apps&nbsp;▸ Tails&nbsp;▸ Persistent Storage**.

[[!toc levels=3]]

<div class="note">

<p>Only the features that are listed below can currently be made
persistent.</p>

<p>We are often asked to implement new features of the Persistent Storage: Tor
Browser preferences, Tor configuration, desktop background, mouse and touchpad
settings, and so on. See the [[!tails_gitlab
groups/tails/-/issues?scope=all&utf8=✓&state=opened&label_name%5B%5D=C%3APersistence
desc="list of issues about the Persistent Storage in our GitLab"]].<p>

</div>

Personal Documents
==================

<a id="persistent_folder"></a>

<div class="icon">
[[!img lib/apps/folder.png link="no" alt=""]]
<div class="text"><h2>Persistent Folder</h2></div>
</div>

When the Persistent Folder feature is turned on, you can save your personal files and working
documents in the *Persistent* folder.

To open the *Persistent* folder:

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Accessories&nbsp;▸  Files**.

1. Select the *Persistent* folder in the sidebar.

System Settings
===============

<a id="welcome_screen"></a>

<div class="icon">
[[!img lib/apps/preferences-system.png link="no" alt=""]]
<div class="text"><h2>Welcome Screen</h2></div>
</div>

When the Welcome Screen feature is turned on, the settings from the
[[Welcome Screen|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen]] are saved in the Persistent Storage: language, keyboard,
and additional settings.

To restore your settings when starting Tails, unlock your Persistent
Storage in the Welcome Screen.

<a id="printers"></a>

<div class="icon">
[[!img lib/apps/printer.png link="no" alt=""]]
<div class="text"><h2>Printers</h2></div>
</div>

When the Printers feature is turned on, the
[[configuration of the printers|doc/sensitive_documents/printing_and_scanning]]
is saved in the Persistent Storage.

Network
=======

<a id="network_connections"></a>

<div class="icon">
[[!img lib/apps/network-manager.png link="no" alt=""]]
<div class="text"><h2>Network Connections</h2></div>
</div>

When the Network Connections feature is turned on, the
[[password for Wi-Fi networks and configuration of wired networks|doc/anonymous_internet/networkmanager]]
are saved in the Persistent Storage.

<a id="bridge">

<div class="icon">
[[!img lib/apps/tor-connection.png link="no" alt=""]]
<div class="text"><h2>Tor Bridge</h2></div>
</div>

When the Tor Bridge feature is turned on, the last [[Tor
bridge|doc/anonymous_internet/tor]] that you used to connect to Tor
successfully is saved in the Persistent Storage.

Applications
============

<a id="bookmarks"></a>

<div class="icon">
[[!img lib/apps/user-bookmarks.png link="no" alt=""]]
<div class="text"><h2>Tor Browser Bookmarks</h2></div>
</div>

When the Tor Browser Bookmarks feature is turned on, changes to the bookmarks in
[[*Tor Browser*|doc/anonymous_internet/Tor_Browser]]
are saved in the Persistent Storage.

<a id="electrum"></a>

<div class="icon">
[[!img lib/apps/electrum.png link="no" alt=""]]
<div class="text"><h2>Electrum Bitcoin Wallet</h2></div>
</div>

When the Electrum Bitcoin Wallet feature is turned on, the bitcoin wallet and preferences of
the [[*Electrum* bitcoin client|anonymous_internet/electrum]] are saved in the
Persistent Storage.

<a id="thunderbird"></a>

<div class="icon">
[[!img lib/apps/thunderbird.png link="no" alt=""]]
<div class="text"><h2>Thunderbird Email Client</h2></div>
</div>

When the Thunderbird Email Client feature is turned on, the email, feeds, and OpenPGP keys in the
[[*Thunderbird* email client|doc/anonymous_internet/thunderbird]]
are saved in the Persistent Storage.

<a id="gnupg"></a>

<div class="icon">
[[!img lib/apps/seahorse-key.png link="no" alt=""]]
<div class="text"><h2>GnuPG</h2></div>
</div>

When the GnuPG feature is turned on, the OpenPGP keys that you create or import
in *GnuPG* and [[*Kleopatra*|doc/encryption_and_privacy/kleopatra]] are
saved in the Persistent Storage.

<a id="pidgin"></a>

<div class="icon">
[[!img lib/apps/pidgin.png link="no" alt=""]]
<div class="text"><h2>Pidgin Internet Messenger</h2></div>
</div>

When the Pidgin Internet Messenger feature is turned on, all the configuration files of the
[[*Pidgin* internet messenger|doc/anonymous_internet/pidgin]]
are saved in the Persistent Storage:

- The configuration of your accounts, contacts, and chats

- Your OTR encryption keys and keyring

The content of the discussions is not saved, unless you configure *Pidgin* to
do so.

All the configuration options are available from the graphical interface of
*Pidgin*. You don't need to manually edit or overwrite the configuration
files.

<a id="ssh"></a>

<div class="icon">
[[!img lib/apps/seahorse-key-ssh.png link="no" alt=""]]
<div class="text"><h2>SSH Client</h2></div>
</div>

When the SSH Client feature is turned on, all the files related to the Secure
Shell (SSH) client are saved in the Persistent Storage:

- The SSH keys that you create or import

- The public keys of the hosts you connect to

- The SSH configuration file in */home/amnesia/.ssh/config*

Advanced Settings
=================

<a id="additional_software"></a>

<div class="icon">
[[!img lib/apps/package-x-generic.png link="no" alt=""]]
<div class="text"><h2>Additional Software</h2></div>
</div>

When the Additional Software feature is turned on, a list of
[[additional software|additional_software]] of
your choice is automatically installed every
time you start Tails.

The corresponding software packages are stored in the
Persistent Storage. They are automatically upgraded for security after
a network connection is established.

<div class="caution">

<p>The packages included in Tails are carefully tested for security.
Installing additional packages might break the security built into Tails,
so [[be careful with what you install|additional_software#warning]].</p>

</div>

<a id="dotfiles"></a>

<div class="icon">
[[!img lib/apps/preferences-desktop.png link="no" alt=""]]
<div class="text"><h2>Dotfiles</h2></div>
</div>

When the Dotfiles feature is turned on:

- The *Files* browser has a shortcut to the *Dotfiles* folder in the sidebar.

  The absolute path of the *Dotfiles* folder is
  */live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/dotfiles*.

- All the files in the
  *Dotfiles* folder
  are linked in the *Home* folder using Linux symbolic links.

- All the files in subfolders of the
  *Dotfiles* folder are also linked in the
  corresponding subfolder of the *Home* folder using Linux symbolic links.

For example, having the following files in
the *Dotfiles* folder:

    Dotfiles
    ├── file_a
    ├── folder
    │   ├── file_b
    │   └── subfolder
    │       └── file_c
    └── emptyfolder

Produces the following result in the *Home* folder:

    Home
    ├── file_a → /live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/dotfiles/file_a
    └── folder
        ├── file_b → /live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/dotfiles/folder/file_b
        └── subfolder
            └── file_c → /live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/dotfiles/folder/subfolder/file_c

<div class="note">

<p>The Dotfiles feature only links specific files, and not entire folders, from
the Persistent Storage. Accordingly, empty folders are ignored, as shown in
the above example.</p>

</div>

On Tails and Linux in general, the name of configuration files often starts
with a dot and are sometimes called [[!wikipedia dotfiles]] for this reason.
The Dotfiles feature of the Persistent Storage makes it easy to persist such
"*dotfiles*", for example */home/amnesia/.gitconfig* or */home/amnesia/.bashrc*.

<div class="caution">

<p>Be careful if you use the Dotfiles feature to overwrite the default
settings.</p>

<p>The programs included in Tails are carefully configured with security in
mind. You can weaken your security if you change the defaults.</p>

<p>The anonymity of Tor and Tails relies on making it harder to distinguish one
Tails user from another. In some cases, changing the default settings can break
your anonymity.</p>

</div>

<h3 id="displays">Save the configuration of your displays</h3>

If you have more than one display (for example, two monitors or a
projector), you can save the configuration of your displays using the
**Dotfiles** feature.

1. Turn on the *Dotfiles* feature and restart Tails.

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ System Tools&nbsp;▸ Settings** to open the *Settings* utility.

1. Choose **Displays** in the *Settings* utility.

1. Configure your displays.

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Accessories&nbsp;▸ Files**.

1. Select the *Dotfiles* folder in the sidebar.

1. Select the [[!img lib/go-down.png alt="View Options" class="symbolic" link="no"]]
   button in the title bar and select the option **Show Hidden Files**.

1. Create a folder named *.config* (notice the `.`) in this *Dotfiles* folder.

1. Copy the file *.config/monitors.xml* from your *Home* folder to this
   *.config* folder.

Deleting the data corresponding to a feature
============================================

When you turn off a feature of the Persistent Storage:

- The data of the feature is not available anymore in Tails.

  For example:

  * If you turn off the Persistent Folder feature, the documents saved in
    the *Persistent* folder are not available anymore in the *Files* browser.

  * If you turn off the Electrum Bitcoin Wallet feature, the wallet used by
    *Electrum* is not available anymore.

- The data of the feature is still saved in the USB stick.

  A **Delete Data** button appears in the setting of the feature.

  [[!img delete_data.png link="no" alt=""]]

  * Click the **Delete Data** button to delete the corresponding data from the
    USB stick.

  * Turn on the feature again to restore the data and make it available in
    Tails again.
