[[!meta title="Recovering data from the Persistent Storage when it has file system errors"]]

<!--

To test this doc:

1. Add in a file *config/chroot_local-includes/usr/local/sbin/e2fsck.slow*:

       #!/bin/sh

       if echo "${*}" | grep -w -- "-p"; then
           # only runs for automatic fsck
           sleep 10
           exit 4  # File system errors left uncorrected
       elif echo "${*}" | grep -w -- "-y"; then
           # only runs for manual fsck
           sleep 30
           exit 1  # Error corrected
       fi

       exec /usr/sbin/e2fsck "${@}"

1. Add in a *hook* file at the root of your Git repo:

       #!/bin/sh

       root="${1}"

       mount -o bind \
             "${root}/mnt/config/chroot_local-includes/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages/tps/" \
             "${root}/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages/tps/"
       cp "${root}/mnt/config/chroot_local-includes/usr/local/sbin/e2fsck.slow" "${root}/usr/local/sbin/"

1. Edit *config/chroot_local-includes/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages/tps/device.py*

       diff --git a/config/chroot_local-includes/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages/tps/device.py b/config/chroot_local-includes/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages/tps/device.py
       index adad9d2c6e9..e6559c26f89 100644
       --- a/config/chroot_local-includes/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages/tps/device.py
       +++ b/config/chroot_local-includes/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages/tps/device.py
       @@ -777,7 +777,7 @@ class CleartextDevice:

                try:
                    cmd = [
       -                "e2fsck",
       +                "e2fsck.slow",

1. When starting Tails, add the [[`early_patch`|contribute/build/early-patch]] boot option.

-->

<div class="next">

<p>If instead, your Tails USB stick doesn't start, refer to our instructions on
[[recovering data from the Persistent Storage when Tails doesn't
start|recover]].</p>

</div>

[[!img repair.png class="screenshot" alt="File System Errors dialog in Welcome Screen"]]

Tails can try to fix these errors, but this might erase some of your data and
take a long time.

That is why, if you cannot restore from a recent [[backup]], we recommend that
you create a *partition image* of your Persistent Storage *before* attempting
to repair the file system of your Persistent Storage from the Welcome Screen.

Most of the time, repairing the file system will work fine and will be enough
to fix your Persistent Storage.

In the rare cases when repairing the file system will not work, you might be
able to recover some or most of your data from this partition image using
advanced forensics tools. This recovery process is very technical and you might
need help from someone experienced with data recovery.

[[!toc levels=3]]

<h1 id="image">Creating a partition image of your Persistent Storage</h1>

A partition image is a copy of your entire Persistent Storage in a single file
that you can save to an external hard disk from Tails.

To save the partition image outside of Tails, you need an external hard disk
with as much free space as the size of your Persistent Storage, usually
8&nbsp;GB less than your Tails USB stick. You can also use another USB stick of
the same size as your Tails USB stick, but writing to a USB stick is usually
much slower than writing to a hard disk.

<div class="caution">

<p>The partition image contains a <i>decrypted</i> version of your
Persistent Storage.</p>

<p>We recommend that you save the partition image to an [[encrypted hard
disk|encryption_and_privacy/encrypted_volumes]].</p>

</div>

We are presenting here 2 different techniques to create a partition image of
your Persistent Storage.

1. [[Create a partition image using the *Disks* utility|fsck#disks]]

   Try this technique first if the hardware of your USB stick is not failing.

1. [[Create a partition image using `ddrescue` on the command line|fsck#ddrescue]]

   Try this technique first if the hardware of your USB stick is failing.

   Using `ddrescue` is more difficult but is better than the *Disks* utility to
   recover data if the hardware of your USB stick is failing.

<h2 id="disks">Creating a partition image using the <i>Disks</i> utility</h2>

When the hardware of your USB stick is not failing, using the *Disks* utility
is the simplest way of creating a partition image of your Persistent Storage.

<h3 id="external">Preparing the external hard disk</h3>

1. Start Tails.

1. In the Welcome Screen:

   1. [[Set up an administration
      password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

   2. Choose to start without unlocking your Persistent Storage.

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Accessories&nbsp;▸ Files** to open the *Files* browser.

1. Plug in the hard disk on which you want to save the partition image of your
   Persistent Storage. You need as much free space as the size of your
   Persistent Storage, usually 8&nbsp;GB less than your Tails USB stick.

   A new volume appears in the sidebar of the *Files* browser.

1. Right-click (on Mac, click with two fingers) on the new volume that
   appeared in the sidebar of the *Files* browser and choose *Properties* in
   the shortcut menu.

   Take note of the free space in the volume.

<h3 id="identify">Identifying your Persistent Storage in the <i>Disks</i> utility</h3>

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Utilities&nbsp;▸ Disks** to open the *Disks* utility.

1. In the left pane of the *Disks* utility, identify your Tails USB stick in
   the list of storage devices.

   Verify its brand and size.

1. In the left pane, click on the storage device that corresponds to your Tails
   USB stick.

1. In the right pane, this storage device should have 2 volumes, corresponding
   to 2 partitions on the USB stick.

   - 1 volume with a **Tails** label and **FAT** content.

     This volume corresponds to the system partition of your Tails.

   - 1 volume with a **TailsData** label and **LUKS** content.

     This volume corresponds to the encrypted version of your Persistent Storage.

   [[!img disks.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

1. In the right pane, click on the volume that corresponds to your
   Persistent Storage.

   Verify that the content of the volume is of type **LUKS Encryption**.

<h3 id="unlock">Unlocking your Persistent Storage in the <i>Disks</i> utility</h3>

Before creating the partition image, unlock the encryption to access the
decrypted version of your Persistent Storage. To do so:

1. Click [[!img lib/unlock.png link="no" class="symbolic" alt="Unlock selected encrypted partition"]].

1. In the **Enter passphrase to unlock** dialog, enter the passphrase of your
   Persistent Storage.

1. Click **Unlock**.

1. In the **Authentication Required** dialog, enter your administration
   password.

   <div class="bug">

   <p>If unlocking fails at this step, your Persistent Storage is so damaged
   that decryption is impossible, making all your data completely
   unrecoverable.</p>

   </div>

1. In the right pane, click on the new volume that appears below the
   **LUKS** volume.

   Verify that the content of the new volume is of type **Ext4**.

   This volume corresponds to the decrypted version of your Persistent Storage.

1. Verify that the size of your decrypted Persistent Storage is smaller than the
   available free space in the external hard disk.

1. Take note of the device name of your Persistent Storage.

   The device name is composed of `/dev/mapper/luks`, followed by letters and numbers.

<h3 id="create">Creating the partition image</h3>

1. Choose **[[!img lib/system-run.png link="no" class="symbolic"
   alt="Additional partition options"]]&nbsp;▸ Create Partition Image**.

1. In the **Create Disk Image** dialog:

   - In the **Name** field, specify *persistent-storage.img*.

   - In the **Save in Folder** menu, choose the external hard disk to which you want
     to save the partition image.

   Click the **Start Creating** button.

1. In the **Authentication Required** dialog, enter your administration
   password.

1. After the creation of the partition image finishes:

   - If the creation succeeded, shutdown Tails.

     You can now safely start [[recovering data from the Persistent
     Storage|fsck#welcome]].

   - If the creation failed, try the second technique described below to
     [[create a partition image using `ddrescue` on the command
     line|fsck#ddrescue]] instead.

<h2 id="ddrescue">Creating a partition image using <span class="code">ddrescue</span> on the command line</h2>

If creating a partition image using the *Disks* utility fails, you can try this
second technique using `ddrescue`, which can be more resilient to hardware
failures.

The `ddrescue` utility tries to copy first the parts of the Persistent Storage
that are not failing and skips over the parts that are failing. After that, you
can run `ddrescue` again to try to copy the parts that failed the first time.

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Accessories&nbsp;▸ Files** to open the *Files* browser.

1. In the *Files* browser, navigate to the folder of the external hard disk where
   you want to save the partition image of your Persistent Storage.

1. Right-click in the empty space of the right pane and choose **Open in
   Console** in the shortcut menu.

   Doing so opens a console that is configured to operate in this folder.

1. In the console, execute the following command. Replace
   <span class="command-placeholder">/dev/mapper/luks-xyz</span> with the device name found
   when [[identifying your *Persistent Storage* in the *Disks* utility|fsck#identify]].

   <p class="command-template">sudo ddrescue <span class="command-placeholder">/dev/mapper/luks-xyz</span> persistent-storage.img ddrescue.log</p>

   The output of `ddrescue` looks like this:

       GNU ddrescue 1.29
       Press Ctrl-C to interrupt
            ipos:  749404 kB, non-trimmed:        0 B,  current rate:  34996 kB/s
            ipos:    1446 MB, non-trimmed:        0 B,  current rate:  24772 kB/s
            opos:    1446 MB, non-scraped:        0 B,  average rate:  33629 kB/s
       non-tried:    9290 MB,  bad-sector:        0 B,    error rate:       0 B/s
         rescued:    1446 MB,   bad areas:        0,        run time:         43s
       pct rescued:   13.46%, read errors:        0,  remaining time:      1m 31s
                                     time since last successful read:          0s
       Copying non-tried blocks... Pass 1 (forwards)

   The section about **bad areas** refers to errors reading the data of your
   Persistent Storage, most likely because of hardware failures.

1. After `ddrescue` finishes:

   - If bad areas were reported, try leaving your USB stick to rest for some
     minutes and executing the same `ddrescue` command again to copy more data.

     We recommend that you replace your USB stick and [[copy the partition image
     to a new USB stick|fsck#copy]] after you execute `ddrescue` several times.

   - If no bad areas were reported or if the same bad areas were reported after
     several executions of the `ddrescue` command, it means that all the data
     that could be rescued was copied to the partition image.

1. Shut down Tails.

   You can now safely start [[recovering data from the Persistent
   Storage|fsck#welcome]].

<h1 id="recover">Recovering data from the Persistent Storage</h1>

After [[creating a partition image|fsck#image]], you can safely try to recover
data from your Persistent Storage without risking erasing more data.

We are presenting here 3 recovery techniques that work in different cases. We
recommend that you try the 3 techniques one after the other.

1. [[Repairing the file system from the Welcome Screen|fsck#welcome]]

   If the hardware of your USB stick is not failing, repairing the file system
   from the Welcome Screen is likely the easiest technique.

1. [[Copying the partition image to a new USB stick|fsck#copy]]

   If the hardware of your USB stick is failing, you might still be able to
   repair the file system of your Persistent Storage after copying the
   partition image to a new USB stick.

1. [[Analyzing the partition image using *Autopsy*|fsck#autopsy]]

   [*Autopsy*](https://www.autopsy.com/) is an advanced digital forensics tool
   that allows recovering files, even from broken file systems.

<h2 id="welcome">Repairing the file system from the Welcome Screen</h2>

If the hardware of your USB stick is not failing, repairing the file system
from the Welcome Screen is likely the easiest technique.

1. Start on the Tails USB stick that has file system errors.

1. In the Welcome Screen, try to unlock the Persistent Storage.

1. When the error message about file system errors appears, click on the
   **Repair File System** button.

   [[!img repair.png class="screenshot" alt="File System Errors dialog in Welcome Screen"]]

1. The repair of the file system starts.

   The repair can take a long time, from a few seconds to several hours.

   If the repair takes more than a day, shutdown Tails and try [[analyzing the
   partition image using *Autopsy*|fsck#autopsy]] instead.

   [[!img repairing.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

1. After the repair finishes:

   - If the repair succeeded, start Tails and verify the content of your
     Persistent Storage.

     <div class="tip">

     <p>We recommend that you keep the partition image for some time.</p>

     <p>If you realize later on that some files are missing or damaged, you
     might be able to recover them by [[analyzing the partition image using
     <i>Autopsy</i>|fsck#autopsy]].</p>

     </div>

   - If the repair failed, try to [[copy the partition image to a new USB
     stick|fsck#copy]] as described below.

<h2 id="copy">Copying the partition image to a new USB stick</h2>

If the hardware of your USB stick is failing, you might still be able to
repair the file system of your Persistent Storage after copying the
partition image to a new USB stick.

<h3 id="install">Creating a new Tails USB stick with Persistent Storage</h3>

1. [[Install Tails|install]] on a new USB stick.

   The new USB stick must be at least as large as your current Tails USB stick.

1. Start on the new Tails.

1. When starting Tails, [[set up an administration password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

1. Create a Persistent Storage on the new Tails.

1. Close the Persistent Storage settings after creation, when the list of
   features is displayed.

   The process described below overwrites the contents and configuration of the new Persistent
   Storage. So, it does not matter which features you turn on after creating
   the Persistent Storage.

<h3 id="restore">Copying the partition image onto the new USB stick</h3>

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Utilities&nbsp;▸ Disks** to open the *Disks* utility.

1. In the left pane of the *Disks* utility, identify your new Tails USB stick in
   the list of storage devices.

   Verify its brand and size.

1. In the left pane, click on the storage device that corresponds to your new Tails
   USB stick.

1. In the right pane, this storage device should have 3 volumes.

   - 1 volume with a **Tails** label and **FAT** content.

     This volume corresponds to the system partition of your Tails.

   - 1 volume with a **TailsData** label and **LUKS** content.

     This volume corresponds to the encrypted version of your Persistent Storage.

   - 1 volume with a **TailsData** label and **Ext4** content.

     This volume corresponds to the decrypted version of your Persistent Storage.

1. In the right pane, click on the **Ext4** volume, which is the one that
   corresponds to the decrypted version of your Persistent Storage.

   In the attributes below the volume, verify that its device is
   */dev/mapper/TailsData_unlocked*.

1. Click on the [[!img lib/media-playback-stop.png link="no" class="symbolic"
   alt="Unmount selected partition"]] button to unmount the Persistent Storage.

1. Plug in the hard disk on which you saved the partition image of your
   Persistent Storage.

1. Choose **[[!img lib/system-run.png link="no" class="symbolic"
   alt="Additional partition options"]]&nbsp;▸ Restore Partition Image**.

1. In the **Restore Disk Image** dialog, browse for the partition image on the
   hard disk that you plugged in.

1. Click on the **Start Restoring** button.

1. After the restoration finishes, restart on the new Tails USB stick.

<h3 id="fix">Fixing the file system errors on the new USB stick</h3>

1. In the Welcome Screen, try to unlock the Persistent Storage.

1. If an error message about file system errors appears, click on the **Repair
   File System** button.

   [[!img repair.png class="screenshot" alt="File System Errors dialog in Welcome Screen"]]

1. The repair of the file system starts.

   The repair can take a long time, from a few seconds to several hours.

   If the repair takes more than a day, shutdown Tails and try [[analyzing the
   partition image using *Autopsy*|fsck#autopsy]] instead.

   [[!img repairing.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

1. After the repair finishes:

   - If the repair succeeded, start Tails and verify the content of your
     Persistent Storage.

     <div class="tip">

     <p>We recommend that you keep the partition image for some time.</p>

     <p>If you realize later on that some files are missing or damaged, you
     might be able to recover them by [[analyzing the partition image using
     <i>Autopsy</i>|fsck#autopsy]].</p>

     </div>

   - If the repair failed, try to [[analyze the partition image using
     *Autopsy*|fsck#copy]] as described below.

<h2 id="autopsy">Analyzing the partition image using <i>Autopsy</i></h2>

[*Autopsy*](https://www.autopsy.com/) is an advanced digital forensics tool
that allows recovering files, even from broken file systems.

*Autopsy* is open source and available for free on Windows, macOS, and Linux.

To avoid leaving traces of the content of your Persistent Storage on the
operating system where *Autopsy* is used, we recommend that you use *Autopsy*
in Tails. But, *Autopsy* is easier to install in Windows than in Tails.

We are not providing step-by-step instructions on how to install and use
*Autopsy*.

If you don't feel confident installing and using *Autopsy* on your own, we
recommend that you get help from someone with more experience with Linux and
data recovery.

You can also read the [Autopsy User
Documentation](http://sleuthkit.org/autopsy/docs/user-docs/latest).

### Installing *Autopsy* in Tails

The general steps are:

1. From the [download page](https://www.autopsy.com/download/), download the 2
   binaries needed to run *Autopsy*:

   - The DEB file of *The Sleuth Kit*.

   - The ZIP file of *Autopsy*.

1. From the [installation instructions of *Autopsy* for
   Linux](https://github.com/sleuthkit/autopsy/blob/develop/Running_Linux_OSX.md),
   download the 2 scripts needed for the installation:

   - `install_prereqs_ubuntu.sh`

   - `install_application.sh`

1. Execute the following commands in a *Console*. Replace
   <span class="command-placeholder">version</span> with the version number of
   *The Sleuth Kit* and *Autopsy* that you downloaded.

   <!-- The packages openjdk-17-jdk/unstable and openjdk-17-jre/unstable are needed in Debian 13 (Trixie). -->

   <p class="command">sudo apt install libsqlite3-dev libc3p0-java unzip openjdk-17-jdk/unstable openjdk-17-jre/unstable</p>

   <p class="command">sudo bash install_prereqs_ubuntu.sh</p>

   <p class="command">sudo dpkg -i sleuthkit-java_<span class="command-placeholder">version</span>_amd64.deb</p>

   <p class="command">bash install_application.sh -z autopsy-<span class="command-placeholder">version</span>.zip -i ~/Persistent/autopsy -j /usr/lib/jvm/java-17-openjdk-amd64</p>

   <p class="command">/home/amnesia/Persistent/autopsy/autopsy-<span class="command-placeholder">version</span>/bin/autopsy</p>

1. When starting for the first time, *Autopsy* freezes on **Starting modules**.

   Press **Enter** to continue.

### Using *Autopsy* to analyze the partition image

The general steps are:

1. Start *Autopsy*.

1. Open a new case.

1. Add the partition image of the Persistent Storage as a data source.

1. *Autopsy* analyzes the data source.

   After the analysis finishes, the files that were recovered are listed in
   different ways in the left sidebar, for example, both as a file system tree
   and by type of files.

   [[!img autopsy.png class="screenshot" alt="Autopsy in Tails showing files recovered from the partition image of a Persistent Storage"]]

1. Extract the files that you want to recover to the case folder.
