[[!meta title="Recovering data from the Persistent Storage when Tails doesn't start"]]

If your Tails becomes broken, for example, if it no longer starts, follow
these instructions to recover data from your Persistent Storage.

<div class="next">

<p>If instead, your Tails USB stick does start but the Persistent Storage fails
to unlock, refer to our instructions on [[recovering data from the Persistent
Storage when it has file system errors|fsck]].</p>

</div>

<div class="tip">

<p>We recommend you always keep a current backup of your Persistent Storage. To learn
how to create a backup of your Persistent Storage, see our [[instructions on
how to back up your Persistent Storage to another Tails USB
stick|backup]].</p>

</div>

We are presenting here 3 recovery techniques that work in different cases. We
recommend that you try the 3 techniques one after the other.

1. [[Doing a manual upgrade|recover#upgrade]]

   Doing a manual upgrade of your broken Tails might allow you to start your
   USB stick again and use your Persistent Storage like before.

1. [[Unlocking from another Tails and copying using `rsync`|recover#rsync]]

   If doing a manual upgrade doesn't work, you might be able to unlock your
   Persistent Storage from another Tails USB stick and copy its content using
   `rsync` on the command line.

1. [[Recovering from a partition image using forensics tools|recover#image]]

   If unlocking your Persistent Storage from another Tails USB stick fails, you
   might be able to recover some or most of your data from a partition image
   using advanced forensics tools.

<h1 id="upgrade">Doing a manual upgrade</h1>

<!-- Indented to deduplicate with same sentence earlier. -->

   Doing a manual upgrade of your broken Tails might allow you to start your USB
   stick again and use your Persistent Storage like before.

Refer to our instructions on how to do a manual upgrade, either:

- [[Downloading and upgrading from Windows|upgrade/windows]]

- [[Downloading and upgrading from macOS|upgrade/mac]]

- [[Downloading and upgrading from Linux|upgrade/linux]]

- [[Upgrading by cloning from another Tails|doc/upgrade/#clone]]

<h1 id="rsync">Unlocking from another Tails and copying using <span class="code">rsync</span></h1>

<!-- Indented to deduplicate with same sentence earlier. -->

   If doing a manual upgrade doesn't work, you might be able to unlock your
   Persistent Storage from another Tails USB stick and copy its content using
   `rsync` on the command line.

1. Install Tails on a new USB stick onto which you want to recover your Persistent
   Storage. Make sure that this new USB stick is at least
   as large as the USB stick that has your broken Tails on it.

1. When starting Tails, [[set up an administration
   password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

1. [[Create a Persistent Storage.|persistent_storage/create]]

1. Close the Persistent Storage settings after creation, when the list of
   features is displayed.

   The process described below overwrites the contents and configuration of the new Persistent
   Storage. So, it does not matter which features you turn on after creating
   the Persistent Storage.

   <div class="caution">

   <p>Make sure that all applications are closed before continuing with these
   instructions. Otherwise, the Persistent Storage might not be properly
   recovered from your broken Tails.</p>

   </div>

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Accessories&nbsp;▸ Files** to open the *Files* browser.

1. Plug in the USB stick that has your broken Tails on it.

   If the Persistent Storage of your broken Tails is recognized,
   a new encrypted volume appears in the sidebar of the
   *Files* browser. Click on it and enter the
   passphrase of your broken Tails to unlock the volume.

   The Persistent Storage of your broken Tails shows up as
   **TailsData**.

   <div class="bug">

   <p>If no encrypted volume appears, try [[recovering from a partition image
   using forensics tools|recover#image]].</p>

   </div>

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ System Tools&nbsp;▸ Console**.

1. Execute the following command to recover the Persistent Storage of your
   broken Tails to your new Tails:

   <p class="command">sudo rsync -PaSHAXv --del /media/amnesia/TailsData/ /live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked</p>

1. When the command finishes, it displays a summary of the data that was copied. For example:

       sent 32.32M bytes  received 1.69K bytes  21.55M bytes/sec
       total size is 32.30M  speedup is 1.00

   You can now eject the **TailsData** volume in the
   *Files* browser and unplug the USB stick that
   has your broken Tails on it.

You can also explore the content of the Persistent Storage on your broken Tails
from the *Files* browser. To do so, execute the following command from the
*Console*.

   <p class="command">nautilus admin:/media/amnesia/TailsData/</p>

<h1 id="image">Recovering from a partition image using forensics tools</h1>

<!-- Indented to deduplicate with same sentence earlier. -->

   If unlocking your Persistent Storage from another Tails USB stick fails, you
   might be able to recover some or most of your data from a partition image
   using advanced forensics tools.

We are not providing step-by-step instructions, but you can adapt our
instructions on [[recovering data from the Persistent Storage when it has file
system errors|fsck]]:

1. Start on your new Tails and save a partition image of the Persistent Storage
   of your broken Tails to an external hard disk.

   Try the technique using the [[*Disks* utility|fsck#disks]] first, then the
   technique using [[`ddrescue`|fsck#ddrescue]] if needed.

1. After you create the partition image, try to recover your data.

   Try the technique to [[copy the partition image to a new USB
   stick|fsck#copy]] first, then the technique using
   [[*Autopsy*|fsck#autopsy]].
