[[!meta title="Introduction to GNOME and the Tails desktop"]]

The desktop environment used in Tails is [GNOME](https://www.gnome.org).
This page describes some important features of the desktop in the context of
Tails.

[[!toc levels=3]]

<h1 id="top-navigation-bar">Top navigation bar</h1>

In the upper-left corner of the screen, there are 2 elements:

[[!img upper-left.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

- The Activities button [[!img lib/activities.png class="symbolic" link="no" alt=""]]

- The Apps menu

<h2 id="activities">Activities button</h2>

The shape of the Activities button represents your workspaces, the grouping of
windows on your desktop. For example, below is the shape of the Activities
button if you have 3 workspaces and the second workspace is the one that it
displayed right now.

[[!img lib/workspaces.png class="symbolic" link="no" alt=""]]

To open the Activities Overview, you can either:

- Click on the Activities button.

- Throw your mouse pointer to the upper-left corner of the screen.

- Press the [[!img lib/start.png class="symbolic" link="no" alt="Super"]] key on your keyboard.

You can see your windows and applications in the overview. You can also
start typing to search your applications, files, and folders.

<h2 id="applications">Apps menu</h2>

The **Apps** menu provides launchers for the
[[included software|about/features]] and GNOME utilities.

[[!img applications.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

<a id="help"></a>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/settings.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

    <p><b><i>Settings</i></b></p>

    <p>To change various system settings such as keyboard, mouse,
    touchpad, or displays, choose <b>System Tools&nbsp;▸ Settings</b>.</p>

    <div class="next">

    <p>By default, any setting that you change in Tails is lost when you shut
    down. Only the settings that you saved in the [[Persistent
    Storage|persistent_storage]] are restored when you restart Tails.</p>

    </div>

    <div class="tip">

    <p>To learn about the many keyboard shortcuts in GNOME, open the
    <i>Settings</i>. At the bottom of the <b>Keyboard</b> section, choose
    <b>View and Customize Shortcuts</b>.</p>

    </div>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/help-about.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>About Tails</i></b></p>

  <p>To know the version of Tails that you are currently running, choose
  <b>Tails</b>&nbsp;▸ <b>About Tails</b>.</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/help-browser.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Help</i></b></p>

  <p>To access the <b>GNOME Desktop Help</b>, choose
  <b>Utilities</b>&nbsp;▸ <b>Help</b>.</p>

  </div>

</div>

<h3 id="favorites">Favorites submenu</h3>

In the **Favorites** submenu, a few
shortcuts allow you to launch the most frequently used applications:

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/tor-browser.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Tor Browser</i></b> allows you to browse the web anonymously
  and uncensored.</p>

  <p>See [[browsing the web with <i>Tor Browser</i>|anonymous_internet/Tor_Browser]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/tor-connection.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Tor Connection</i></b> allows you to connect to the Tor
  network.</p>

  <p>See [[connecting to Tor|anonymous_internet/tor]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/persistent_storage.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Persistent Storage</i></b> allows you to save some of your
  files and configuration in an encrypted Persistent Storage on your Tails
  USB stick.</p>

  <p>See [[Persistent Storage|persistent_storage]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/help-browser.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Tails Documentation</i></b> opens an offline version of the Tails
  website and documentation.</p>

  <p>See our [[documentation|doc]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/whisperback.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>WhisperBack Error Reporting</i></b> allows you to report
  problems to our team.</p>

  <p>See [[reporting an error|whisperback]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/tails-installer.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Tails Cloner</i></b> allows you to clone your Tails to another
  USB stick and back up your Persistent Storage.</p>

  <p>See [[installing by cloning from another Tails on PC|install/clone]].</p>

</div>
</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/thunderbird.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Thunderbird</i></b> allows you to write emails and read RSS and
  Atom feeds.</p>

  <p>See [[emailing and reading news with
  <i>Thunderbird</i>|anonymous_internet/thunderbird]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/secrets.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p>The <b><i>Secrets</i></b> password manager allows you to store and manage secure
  passwords.</p>

  <p>See [[managing passwords using the
  <i>Secrets</i>|encryption_and_privacy/manage_passwords]] password manager.</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/files.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p>The <b><i>Files</i></b> browser allows you to browse and organize your
  files, create folders, and [[connect to SSH or SFTP
  servers|desktop#files]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<h2 id="tor-status">Tor status and circuits</h2>

The Tor status icon ([[!img lib/symbolic/tor-disconnected.png alt="Tor status menu" link="no" class="symbolic"]] or [[!img lib/symbolic/tor-connected.png alt="Tor status menu" link="no" class="symbolic"]]) provides a shortcut to *Onion
Circuits*, which allows you to manage the Tor circuits being used by Tails.

[[!img tor_status.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

[[See our documentation on *Onion Circuits*.|anonymous_internet/tor/circuits]]

<h2 id="accessibility">Accessibility menu</h2>

The accessibility menu allows you to activate the screen reader,
screen keyboard, large text display, and other assistive technologies.

[[!img accessibility.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

[[See our documentation on accessibility.|accessibility]]

<h2 id="keyboard">Keyboard layouts</h2>

The keyboard layout menu allow you to change the keyboard layout and
input method for non-Latin scripts.

[[!img keyboard.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

<h2 id="system">System menu</h2>

In the top-right corner of the top navigation bar, the system menu allows you to
manage your settings, connect to a Wi-Fi network, and restart your computer.

[[!img system-with-wired.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

<h3 id="networking">Networking</h3>

From the system menu, you can choose which Wi-Fi network to connect to.

See also the documentation on [[connecting to a network|anonymous_internet/networkmanager]].

<h3 id="screen-locker">Screen locker</h3>

Select the **Lock Screen** button to lock your screen with a password.

- If you set up an [[administration password|first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]]
  when starting Tails, you can unlock your screen with your administration
  password.

  <div class="tip">

  <p>Your screen will automatically lock after some time if you have set up an
  administration password. To disable this behavior, execute the following
  command in a console.</p>

  <p class="command">gsettings set org.gnome.desktop.screensaver lock-enabled false</p>

  </div>

- Otherwise, you can set up a password to unlock your screen when locking your
  screen for the first time.

  [[!img screen_locker.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

<h3 id="suspend">Suspend</h3>

Click **Suspend** to suspend your computer.

While suspended, your computer is not computing anymore but is still powered on,
like if it was standing still but still alive.

To resume from suspend and go back to the Tails desktop, push the power button
of your computer.

<div class="caution">

<p>If you remove your Tails USB stick while suspended, your computer will not
shut down immediately and will only shut down when resuming.</p>

<p>An attacker with physical access to your computer and capable of finding
your screen locker password or setting up a [[cold boot
attack|doc/advanced_topics/cold_boot_attacks]] can compromise your Tails while
suspended.</p>

<p>For more security, [[shut down Tails|doc/first_steps/shutdown]] entirely.</p>

</div>

<h3 id="night_and_dark">Dark Mode and Night Light</h3>

From the system menu, you can switch between:

- The default *light* mode with colder colors and more brightness

  [[!img light.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

- A *dark* mode

  [[!img dark.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

- A *night light* mode with warmer colors and less brightness

  [[!img night.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

- A combination of both the *dark* mode and *night light* mode

  [[!img dark_night.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

<div class="note">

<p>Night Light is unavailable when running Tails in a [[virtual
machine|doc/advanced_topics/virtualization]].</p>

</div>

<h1 id="shortcuts">Keyboard shortcuts</h1>

To learn about all keyboard shortcuts in GNOME visit [GNOME Help: Useful
keyboard shortcuts](https://help.gnome.org/gnome-help/shell-keyboard-shortcuts.html)
or use the *Settings* utility in Tails:

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ System Tools&nbsp;▸ Settings**.

1. In the *Settings* utility, choose **Keyboard&nbsp;▸ Keyboard
   Shortcuts&nbsp;▸ View and Customize Shortcuts**.

<h1 id="files">The <i>Files</i> browser</h1>

To open the *Files* browser, choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Accessories&nbsp;▸ Files**.

[[!img lib/apps/files.png link="no" alt=""]]

To connect to a remote SFTP (SSH File Transfer Protocol) server:

1. Choose **Network** in the sidebar of the *Files* browser.

1. Specify an SSH or SFTP server in the **Server address** field
   at the bottom of the right pane. For example:

       ssh://user@example.com/

1. Click **Connect**.
