[[!meta title="Welcome Screen"]]

The Welcome Screen
appears after the Boot Loader, but before the
GNOME Desktop.

You can use the Welcome Screen to specify startup options that alter some of the basic
functioning of Tails.

[[!img welcome_screen.png class="screenshot" alt="Welcome to Tails!"]]

To start Tails without options, click on the
**Start Tails** button.

<div class="note">

<p>To store the settings of the Welcome Screen across different Tails sessions,
turn on the [[Welcome Screen|persistent_storage/configure#welcome_screen]]
feature of the Persistent Storage.</p>

<p>With this feature turned on, unlock your Persistent Storage to
restore your settings in the Welcome Screen.</p>

</div>

[[!toc levels=2]]

<a id="accessibility"></a>

Assistive technologies
======================

You can activate several assistive technologies, like a screen reader or large
text, from the accessibility menu in the top bar, the
[[!img lib/accessibility.png alt="accessibility menu" class="symbolic" link="no"]]
icon that looks like a person.

<a id="locale"></a>

Language and formats
====================

You can configure Tails depending on your language and location from
the Welcome Screen.

[[!img locale.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

* The **Language** option allows you to change
  the main language of the interface.

  Text that is not translated yet will appear in English. You can [[help
  to translate more text|contribute/how/translate]].

* The **Keyboard Layout** option allows you to
  change the layout of the keyboard. For example to switch to an
  *AZERTY* keyboard which is common in France.

  You will still be able to switch between different keyboard layouts from the
  desktop after starting Tails.

  [[!img desktop/keyboard.png class="screenshot" alt="Keyboard Menu"]]

* The **Formats** option allows you to change
  the date and time format, first day of the week, measurement units,
  and default paper size according to the standards in use in a country.

  For example, the USA and the United Kingdom, two English-speaking countries,
  have different standards:

  <table>
  <tr><th></th><th>USA</th><th>United Kingdom</th></tr>
  <tr><td>Date & time</td><td>3/17/2017 3:56 PM</td><td>17/03/2017 15:56</td></tr>
  <tr><td>First day of the week</td><td>Sunday</td><td>Monday</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Unit system</td><td>Imperial</td><td>Metric</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Paper size</td><td>Letter</td><td>A4</td></tr>
  </table>

  With this option you can also display the calendar in a different language
  than the main language. For example, to display a US calendar, with weeks
  starting on Sunday, when the main language is Russian.

<a id="persistent_storage"></a>

Persistent Storage
==================

You can save some of your files and configuration in an encrypted [[Persistent
Storage|persistent_storage]] on your Tails USB stick.

- If no Persistent Storage is detected on the USB stick, you can click the
  **Create Persistent Storage** button to automatically start the Persistent
  Storage settings after you start Tails and the desktop appears.

  [[!img create_persistent_storage.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

- If a Persistent Storage is detected on the USB stick, enter your passphrase
  and click **Unlock Encryption** to unlock and activate your Persistent
  Storage.

  [[!img unlock_persistent_storage.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

See also our [[documentation on the Persistent Storage|persistent_storage]].

<a id="additional"></a>

Additional settings
===================

Tails is configured with care to be as safe as possible by default. But,
depending on your situation, you can change one of the following
settings from the Welcome Screen.

[[!img additional.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

Administration Password
-----------------------

Set an **Administration Password** to be
able to perform administrative tasks like installing additional
software or accessing the internal hard disks of the computer.

See our documentation about [[the administration password and its
security implications|administration_password]].

MAC Address Anonymization
-------------------------

Disable **MAC Address Anonymization** to prevent
connectivity problems with your network interfaces.

See our documentation about [[MAC address anonymization|mac_spoofing]].

Offline Mode
------------

Turn on the **Offline Mode** if you want to work completely offline for
increased security.

Unsafe Browser
--------------

Disable the ** *Unsafe Browser* **.

See our documentation about [[the *Unsafe Browser* and its security
implications|anonymous_internet/unsafe_browser]].

Keyboard shortcuts
==================

<table>
<tr><td><b>Alt+L</b></td><td><b>Language</b></td></tr>
<tr><td><b>Alt+K</b></td><td><b>Keyboard Layout</b></td></tr>
<tr><td><b>Alt+F</b></td><td><b>Formats</b></td></tr>
<tr><td><b>Alt+P</b></td><td><b>Persistent Storage</b></td></tr>
<tr><td><b>Alt+A</b></td><td><b>Additional Settings</b></td></tr>
<tr><td><b>Ctrl+Shift+A</b></td><td><b>Administration Password</b></td></tr>
<tr><td><b>Ctrl+Shift+M</b></td><td><b>MAC Address Anonymization</b></td></tr>
<tr><td><b>Alt+S</b></td><td><b>Start Tails</b></td></tr>
</table>
