[[!meta title="Converting dangerous documents to safe PDFs using Dangerzone"]]

When you receive untrusted documents, for example, email attachments,
*[Dangerzone](https://dangerzone.rocks/)* allows you to convert them into safe
PDFs before opening.

*Dangerzone* is particularly useful for journalists who might receive dangerous
documents from anonymous sources or download them from the Internet.

<div class="tip">

<p><i>Dangerzone</i> is created by <a href="https://freedom.press/">Freedom of
the Press Foundation</a>, a nonprofit that protects public-interest
journalism. Edward Snowden and Laura Poitras are on its Board of Directors.</p>

</div>

You can install *Dangerzone* in Tails using the [[Additional
Software|additional_software]] feature.

We are not including *Dangerzone* in Tails only because it would be too big
(over 1 GB), but we highly recommend it.

Learn more about [how *Dangerzone* works](https://dangerzone.rocks/about/).

[[!toc levels=2]]

Supported formats
=================

*Dangerzone* works on many file formats, including:

- PDFs

- *Microsoft Office* documents, such as .docx, .xlsx, and .pptx

- *LibreOffice* documents, such as .odt and .ods

- Images, such as .jpg, .gif, .svg, .tiff, and .png

- EPUB ebooks

Differences between *Dangerzone* and *Metadata Cleaner*
=======================================================

Tails also includes [[*Metadata Cleaner*|doc/sensitive_documents/metadata]] to
clean files, but the use cases for *Dangerzone* and *Metadata Cleaner* are very
different.

We recommend that you use:

- *Metadata Cleaner* to [[remove metadata from your files|doc/sensitive_documents/metadata]] before you publish
  or share them.

- *Dangerzone* to sanitize untrusted documents shared with you by others.

<table>
<tr><th></th><th class="w30">*Dangerzone*</th><th class="w30">*Metadata Cleaner*</th></tr>
<tr><td>Safe to use on</td><td>Other people's files</td><td>Your files only</td></tr>
<tr><td>Clean audio and video files</td><td class="cross">No</td><td class="check">Yes</td></tr>
<tr><td>Remove malware and trackers</td><td class="check">Yes</td><td class="cross">No</td></tr>
<tr><td>Remove visual metadata and fingerprints¹</td><td class="cross">No</td><td class="cross">No</td></tr>
<tr><td>Allow selecting text in generated PDFs</td><td class="check">Yes</td><td class="cross">No</td></tr>
<tr><td>Speed</td><td class="cross">Slower</td><td class="check">Faster</td></tr>
<tr><td>Included in Tails by default</td><td class="cross">No</td><td class="check">Yes</td></tr>
</table>

1. For example [[!wikipedia Machine Identification Code desc="printer tracking
dots"]], printing imperfections, or intentional misspellings

System requirements
===================

*Dangerzone* requires a lot of memory in the computer and space in your
Persistent Storage because it relies on [[!wikipedia Containerization
(computing) desc="software containers"]] to manipulate dangerous files
securely.

To install *Dangerzone*, you need at least:

- 8 GB of RAM

- 12 GB available in the Persistent Storage

Installing *Dangerzone*
=======================

To install *Dangerzone* as additional software in Tails, you have to:

1. [[Configure the *Dangerzone* APT repository|dangerzone#configure]]

1. [[Install the *Dangerzone* package|dangerzone#install]]

1. [[Convert a test document|dangerzone#test]]

<h2 id="configure">Configure the <i>Dangerzone</i> APT repository</h2>

1. When starting Tails, [[set up an administration password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Tails&nbsp;▸ Persistent Storage** to open the
   Persistent Storage settings.

   1. Create a Persistent Storage if you don't have one already.

   1. Make sure that the **Additional Software** feature is turned on.

   1. Close the Persistent Storage settings.

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ System Tools&nbsp;▸ Console**.

1. Execute the following command to open the configuration of your Persistent
   Storage in the *Text Editor* with administration rights.

       gnome-text-editor admin:/live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/persistence.conf

   1. Add the following line to store the configuration of third-party APT
      repositories in your Persistent Storage.

          /etc/apt/sources.list.d	source=apt/sources,link

   1. Add the following line to store *Podman* containers in your Persistent
      Storage. [*Podman*](https://podman.io/) is the containerization technology
      used by *Dangerzone*.

          /home/amnesia/.local/share/containers	source=podman

   1. Save your changes and close the *Text Editor*.

1. Execute the following commands to configure the *Dangerzone* repository as
   additional APT repository.

   <p class="command">sudo mkdir /live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/apt/sources</p>

   <p class="command">sudo ln -s /usr/share/tails/apt/dangerzone.sources /live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/apt/sources/</p>

   <div class="caution">

   <p>We include this sources file in Tails for convenience, but installing
   <i>Dangerzone</i> relies on the APT repository hosted by <a
   href="https://freedom.press/">Freedom of the Press Foundation</a>.
   As a consequence:</p>

   <ul>
   <li>You need to trust the packages from this repository not to break the
   security of your Tails.</li>
   <li><i>Dangerzone</i> might stop working in Tails outside of the control of
   the Tails team.</li>
   </ul>

   </div>

1. Restart Tails.

<h2 id="install">Install the <i>Dangerzone</i> package</h2>

1. When starting Tails, [[set up an administration password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

1. [[Connect to the Tor network.|doc/anonymous_internet/tor]]

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ System Tools&nbsp;▸ Console**.

1. Execute the following commands to install the `dangerzone` package and its dependencies.

   <p class="command">sudo apt update</p>

   <p class="command">sudo apt install dangerzone fuse-overlayfs uidmap</p>

1. After the packages are installed, a notification appears to ask if you want
   to install `dangerzone`, `fuse-overlayfs`, and `uidmap` every time you
   start Tails in the future.

   Choose to **Install Every Time**.

1. Close the *Console*.

<h2 id="test">Convert a test document</h2>

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Office&nbsp;▸ Dangerzone** to open *Dangerzone*.

   When opened for the first time, *Dangerzone* installs its container.

   This operation can take several minutes.

   After the setup finishes, *Dangerzone* opens.

   Click the button **Select suspicious documents**.

   [[!img dangerzone.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

1. Select a simple document to test the conversion process, like an empty
   *LibreOffice* document or an image.

   Converting this first document can also take several minutes. After this
   first document, converting other documents will be faster.

   <div class="bug">

   <p>If converting fails with the error <span class="code">Unknown error code
   '125'</span>, restart Tails and try again.</p>

   <p><i>Dangerzone</i> needs a lot of available RAM when running for the first
   time. Restarting Tails frees as much RAM as possible.</p>

   <p><i>Dangerzone</i> requires at least 8 GB of RAM to install.</p>

   </div>

1. After the conversion finishes, the original document is moved to a new
   *unsafe* folder and the name of the safe document that has been created
   includes *safe*. For example:

       ├── document-safe.odt
       └── unsafe
           └── document.odt

<div class="next">

<p>You can use several applications included in Tails to [[edit the safe
PDF|sensitive_documents/pdf]] produced by <i>Dangerzone</i>.</p>

</div>
