[[!meta title="Creating and using LUKS encrypted volumes"]]

[[!toc levels=2]]

<h1 id="luks">Introduction to <i>LUKS</i></h1>

<div class="tip">

<p>The simplest way to carry around the documents that you want to use
with Tails encrypted is to use the [[Persistent
Storage|persistent_storage]].</p>

</div>

You can create other encrypted volumes using
*LUKS* to encrypt, for example, another
USB stick or an external hard disk.
*LUKS* is the standard for disk
encryption in Linux.

- The *Disks* utility allows you to create encrypted volumes.

- The GNOME desktop allows you to open encrypted volumes.

<div class="attack">


<p>Such encrypted volumes, like the Persistent Storage, are not hidden.</p>

<p>An attacker in possession of the device can know that there is an encrypted
volume on it. Take into consideration that you can be forced or tricked to give
out its passphrase.</p>

</div>

<h2 id="comparison">Comparison between <i>LUKS</i> and <i>VeraCrypt</i></h2>

You can also open *VeraCrypt* encrypted
volumes in Tails. *VeraCrypt* is a disk
encryption tool for Windows, macOS, and Linux. [[See our documentation
about *VeraCrypt*.|veracrypt]]

[[!inline pages="doc/encryption_and_privacy/luks_vs_veracrypt.inline" raw="yes" sort="age"]]

<h1 id="creating">Creating an encrypted partition</h1>

Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Utilities&nbsp;▸ Disks** to open the *Disks* utility.

<h2 id="identifying">Identifying your external storage device</h2>

The *Disks* utility lists all the current storage devices on the left side of
the screen.

  1. Plug in the external storage device that you want to use.

  1. A new device appears in the list of storage devices. Click on it.

     [[!img storage_devices_after.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

  1. Check that the description of the device on the right side of the screen
  corresponds to your device: its brand, its size, etc.

<h2 id="formatting">Formatting the device</h2>

  1. Click on the [[!img lib/view-more.png alt="Drive Options" class="symbolic" link="no"]] button
     in the title bar and choose **Format Disk**
     to erase all the existing partitions on the device.

  1. In the **Format Disk** dialog:

     - If you want to overwrite all data on the device, choose **Overwrite
       existing data with zeroes** in the **Erase** menu.

         <div class="caution">
         <p>Overwriting existing data does not erase all data on flash
         memories, such as USB sticks and SSDs (Solid-State Drives).</p>

         <p>See the [[limitations of file deletion|doc/encryption_and_privacy/secure_deletion#spare]].</p>

         </div>

     - Choose **Compatible with all systems and devices (MBR/DOS)** in the
       **Partitioning** menu.

  1. Click **Format**.

  1. In the confirmation dialog, make sure that the device
     is correct.

  1. Click **Format**.

<h2 id="partition">Creating a new encrypted partition</h2>

Now the schema of the partitions in the middle of the screen shows an empty
device:

[[!img empty_device.png class="screenshot" alt="Free Space 123 GB"]]

  1. Click on the **[[!img lib/list-add.png alt="Create partition" class="symbolic" link="no"]]**
     button to create a new partition on the device.

  1. Configure the various settings of your new partition in the
  partition creation assistant:

     - In the **Create Partition** screen:

       - **Partition Size**: you can create a partition
         on the whole device or only on part of it.

         In the example below, we are creating a partition of 4.0 GB on a device of 8.1 GB.

     - In the **Format Volume** dialog:

       - **Volume Name**

         You can give a name to the partition.
         This name remains invisible until the partition is open but can help
         you to identify it during use.

       - **Erase**

         You can choose to overwrite existing data on the partition.

         <div class="caution">

         <p>Overwriting existing data does not erase all data on flash
         memories, such as USB sticks and SSDs (Solid-State Drives).</p>

         <p>See the [[limitations of file deletion|doc/encryption_and_privacy/secure_deletion#spare]].</p>

         </div>

       - **Type**

         Choose **Internal disk for use with Linux systems
         only (Ext4)** and **Password protect volume (LUKS)**.

     - In the **Set Password** screen:

       - **Password**: type a passphrase for the
         encrypted partition and repeat it to confirm.

         <div class="tip">

         <p>We recommend choosing a long passphrase made of 5 to 7 random words.
         <a href="https://theintercept.com/2015/03/26/passphrases-can-memorize-attackers-cant-guess/">Learn
         about the maths behind memorizable and secure passphrases.</a></p>

         </div>

         <div class="caution">
         <p>It is impossible to recover your passphrase if you forget it!</p>

         <p>To help you remember your passphrase, you can write it on a piece of
         paper, store it in your wallet for a few days, and destroy it once
         you know it well.</p>
         </div>

       Then click **Create**.

  1. Creating the partition takes from a few seconds to a few minutes. After
     that, the new encrypted partition appears in the volumes on the device:

     [[!img encrypted_partition.png class="screenshot" alt="Partition 1 4.0 GB LUKS / Filesystem 4.0 GB Ext4"]]

  1. If you want to create another partition in the free space on the
     device, click on the free space and then click on the
     **[[!img lib/list-add.png alt="Create partition" class="symbolic" link="no"]]**
     button again.

<h2 id="using">Using the new partition</h2>

You can open this new partition from the sidebar of the *Files* browser with the
name you gave it.

<h1 id="opening">Opening an existing encrypted partition</h1>

When you plug in a device that has an encrypted partition, Tails offers to
unlock the encryption automatically.

1. Plug in the external storage device that has the encrypted partition.

1. A dialog appears, asking for the passphrase to unlock the partition.

   [[!img unlock.png class="screenshot" alt="Authentication Required"]]

1. Enter the passphrase of the partition in the password prompt and
   click **Unlock**.

   If you turn on the option **Remember Password**, Tails remembers the
   passphrase of this partition only until you shut down. The passphrase is not
   stored in your Persistent Storage.

1. After unlocking, you can access the content of the partition from the
   sidebar of the *Files* browser.

After you finished using the partition, click on the [[!img lib/media-eject.png
alt="Eject" class="symbolic" link="no"]] button next to the partition in the
sidebar of the *Files* browser to eject the partition safety and lock again the
encryption.

<h1 id="os">Opening encrypted volumes from other operating systems</h1>

It is possible to
open such encrypted volumes from other operating systems. But, doing so might
compromise the security provided by Tails.

For example, image thumbnails might be created and saved by the other
operating system. Or, the contents of files might be indexed by the other
operating system.

<h1 id="changing">Changing the passphrase of an existing encrypted partition</h1>

1. Choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Utilities&nbsp;▸ Disks** to open the *Disks* utility.

1. Plug in the external storage device that contains the encrypted partition
   for which you want to change the passphrase.

1. The device appears in the list of storage devices. Click on it.

   [[!img storage_devices_after.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

1. Check that the description of the device on the right side of the screen
corresponds to your device: its brand, its size, etc.

1. Click on the partition displaying a [[!img
   lib/network-wireless-encrypted.png alt="Partition LUKS" class="symbolic"
   link="no"]] in the bottom-right corner.

1. Click on the [[!img lib/system-run.png alt="Additional partition options"
   class="symbolic" link="no"]] button and choose **Change Passphrase** in the
   shortcut menu.
