[[!meta title="Managing passwords using the Secrets password manager"]]

Using the [*Secrets*](https://apps.gnome.org//Secrets/)
password manager you can:

- Store many passwords in an encrypted database, called a *safe*, which is protected by
  a single passphrase of your choice.

- Always use different and stronger passwords, because you only have to
  remember a single passphrase to unlock the entire safe.

- Generate very strong random passwords.

- Generate one-time verification codes for two-factor authentication.

[[!toc]]

<div class="note">

<p>In Tails 7.6 (March 2026), we replaced the
<i>[[KeePassXC|https://keepassxc.org/]]</i> password manager with
<i>Secrets</i>.</p>

<p>You can open your previous <i>KeePassXC</i> database using <i>Secrets</i>,
because both <i>Secrets</i> and <i>KeePassXC</i> use the same file format to
store passwords.</p>

<p>If you miss more advanced features from <i>KeePassXC</i>, you can install
<i>KeePassXC</i> as [[additional
software|persistent_storage/additional_software]]</p>

</div>

<h1 id="create">Creating and saving a password safe</h1>

Follow these steps to create a new password safe and save it in the
Persistent Storage for use in future working sessions.

To learn how to create a Persistent Storage, read our
[[documentation on the Persistent Storage|persistent_storage]].

0. When starting Tails, unlock the Persistent Storage.

0. In Tails, choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Tails&nbsp;▸ Persistent Storage**.

0. Verify that the Persistent Folder feature is turned on.

0. To open *Secrets*, choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Accessories&nbsp;▸ Secrets Password Manager**.

0. To create a new safe, select the **New Safe** button.

0. Create the safe as *Passwords.kdbx* in the *Persistent* folder.

0. The safe is encrypted and protected by
   a passphrase. In the configuration screen **Protect your safe**:

   * Specify a passphrase of your choice in the **Password** text box.
   * Type the same passphrase again in the **Confirm Password** text box.
   * Select **Create**.

   <div class="caution">
   <p>It is impossible to recover your passphrase if you forget it!</p>

   <p>To help you remember your passphrase, you can write it on a piece of
   paper, store it in your wallet for a few days, and destroy it once
   you know it well.</p>
   </div>

0. After creating the safe, select **Open Safe** and enter the passphrase again
   to unlock it.

<h1 id="restore">Restoring and unlocking a password safe</h1>

Follow these steps to unlock a password safe that is saved in the
Persistent Storage from a previous Tails session.

0. When starting Tails, unlock the Persistent Storage.

0. In Tails, choose **Apps&nbsp;▸ Accessories&nbsp;▸ Secrets Password Manager**.

0. If you have a safe named *Passwords.kdbx* in your *Persistent* folder,
   *Secrets* automatically displays a dialog to
   unlock it.

   Enter the passphrase for this safe and select **Unlock**.

0. If you enter a wrong passphrase the following error message
   appears:

   <p class="code">Failed to unlock Safe.</p>

<div class="tip">

<p>You can also double-click your password safe from the <i>Files</i> browser
to open it using the <i>Secrets</i> password manager.</p>

</div>

<h1 id="2fa">Using <i>Secrets</i> as an authenticator app for two-factor authentication</h1>

Many websites offer two-factor authentication as a safer method than using just
a password. For example, you can configure an authentication app, like Google
Authenticator, to generate a one-time code of 6 digits when signing in to a
website.

You can use *Secrets* to generate such one-time codes in Tails. The
technology used to generate these codes is called [[!wikipedia time-based
one-time password]] (TOTP).

To configure two-factor authentication for an entry in your password safe:

1. From the website or application for which you are configuring two-factor
   authentication, identify the *secret* that you need to generate the one-time
   codes. This secret is a string of characters that is often provided together
   with a QR code.

1. In the *Secrets* password manager, select the entry of your safe for which
   you want to configure two-factor authentication.

1. At the bottom of the right pane, select **Show More**.

1. In the new options that appear, enter the secret from the website or
   application in the **One-Time Password Secret** text box.

   A one-time code appears above the **One-Time Password Secret** text box.
