[[!meta title="Securely deleting files"]]

Tails previously included tools to *wipe* files and available disk space. We
removed these tools from Tails 6.0 (February 2024), because we think that they
are not reliable enough on modern storage devices, such as USB sticks and
Solid-State Drives (SSDs).

To better protect from data recovery, use encrypted volumes, overwrite the
entire device, or disintegrate it physically.

[[!toc levels=2]]

<h1 id="risks">Limitations of file deletion</h1>

See also [[!wikipedia Data_erasure desc="Wikipedia: Data Erasure"]].

<h2 id="delete">Deleting a file does not erase its content</h2>

Operating systems do not actually remove the content of a file when the file is
deleted, even after emptying the trash or removing the file from the command
line.

Instead, operating systems only mark the space that was used by the deleted
file as available for future files, because it is much faster to do. However,
the content of the deleted file remains on the device until the operating
system reuses the space for another file.

<div class="attack">

<p>Simple data recovery tools can recover deleted files.</p>

</div>

<h2 id="copy">Other copies of the data might be stored elsewhere</h2>

Other copies of the data might exist elsewhere on the device:

- Some applications, for example, office applications, store temporary backup
  versions of the file to be able to recover from failures.

- Modern operating systems can store a *journal*, a history of recent changes
  to the file system, or *snapshots*, an image of the file system at a
  particular point in time.

<div class="attack">

<p>Simple data recovery tools can recover these other copies.</p>

</div>

<h2 id="spare">Spare memory cells can store a hidden copy of the data</h2>

Flash memory devices, such as USB sticks and SSDs (Solid-State Drives), have
*spare memory cells* that are used to replace broken memory cells over time.
Modern hard disks also integrate small flash memories for performance and
reliability.

Any data that was stored in the device can remain available in these spare
cells.

These spare cells are managed directly by the device and neither the user nor
the operating system can control what is stored in them.

<div class="attack">

<p>Specialized data recovery companies can recover data from spare cells.</p>

</div>

<h1 id="mitigation">Mitigation techniques</h1>

Given the limitations described above, there is no perfect solution to file
deletion.

To better protect from data recovery, you can use one or a combination of these
mitigation techniques, depending on the sensitivity of your data and the risks.

<h2 id="tails">Use Tails to avoid saving files</h2>

All the files that you use in Tails disappear automatically when you shut down,
except the files that you choose to store in the Persistent Storage or other
storage devices.

By making it easy to avoid saving files to storage devices in the first place,
using Tails is already an important mitigation technique given the limitations
of file deletion.

<h2 id="encrypt">Encrypt your storage devices</h2>

When all the data on your device is encrypted, data recovery tools can only
recover encrypted data that is useless without your passphrase.

To better protect deleted files from data recovery, you can reformat your
device and create another encryption with a different passphrase.

- For compatibility with Tails only or with another Linux, use [[LUKS encrypted
  volumes|encrypted_volumes]].

- For compatibility with Windows or macOS, use [[VeraCrypt encrypted
  volumes|veracrypt]].

<div class="attack">

<p>Take into account that you could be forced or tricked to give out your
passphrase.</p>

</div>

<h2 id="overwrite">Overwrite the entire device</h2>

To better protect deleted files from data recovery, you can also reformat and
overwrite the entire device with zeroes.

Even if some data could still be recovered from [[spare memory
cells|secure_deletion#spare]], overwriting the entire device is especially
important if the device is not encrypted.

To do so:

1. Open the *Disks* utility.

   All the current storage devices are listed in the left pane.

1. Plug in the device that you want to reformat and overwrite.

1. A new device appears in the list of devices. Click on it.

   [[!img encrypted_volumes/storage_devices_after.png class="screenshot" alt=""]]

1. Check that the brand and size of the device in the right pane corresponds to
   your device.

1. Click on the [[!img lib/view-more.png alt="Drive Options" class="symbolic" link="no"]] button
   in the title bar and choose **Format Disk**.

1. In the **Format Disk** dialog:

   - Choose **Overwrite existing data with zeroes (Slow)** in the **Erase**
     menu.

     <div class="caution">

     <p>Overwriting existing data does not erase all data on flash
     memories, such as USB sticks and SSDs (Solid-State Drives).</p>

     <p>See the [[limitations of file deletion|doc/encryption_and_privacy/secure_deletion#spare]].</p>

     </div>

   - Choose **Compatible with all systems and devices (MBR/DOS)** in the
     **Partitioning** menu.

1. Click **Format**.

1. In the confirmation dialog, make sure that the device
   is correct.

1. Click **Format** to confirm.

<h2 id="destroy">Physically destroy the device</h2>

As a last resort, physically destroying the device gives the strongest
guarantee against data recovery.

It is unreliable to break the device into a few pieces or burn it with wood
fire.

For top secret documents, the National Security Agency ([[!wikipedia NSA]]) of
the USA recommends disintegration into particles of 2 mm. This can be achieved
using a [good quality household
blender](https://commons.erau.edu/jdfsl/vol16/iss2/1/).
