[[!meta title="Installation instructions"]]

[[!toc levels=2]]

Our installation instructions are optimizing for first time and less technical users, while still
being usable by expert users.

The following scenarios are proposed:

  - [[Install from Windows|install/windows]]
  - [[Install from macOS|install/mac]]
  - [[Install from Linux (all distributions)|install/linux]]
  - [[Install from Debian, Ubuntu, or Mint using the command line and GnuPG|install/expert]]
  - [[Clone from another Tails (for PC)|install/clone/pc]]
  - [[Clone from another Tails (for Mac)|install/clone/mac]]
  - [[Burn a DVD|install/dvd]]
  - [[Download only for USB sticks|install/download]]
  - [[Download only for DVDs and virtual machines|install/download-iso]]

The installation instructions are also adapted to cover 5 [[manual upgrade
scenarios|doc/upgrade#manual]]:

  - [[Upgrade by cloning from another Tails|doc/upgrade/clone]]
  - [[Upgrade from Tails|doc/upgrade/tails]]
  - [[Upgrade from Windows|doc/upgrade/windows]]
  - [[Upgrade from macOS|doc/upgrade/mac]]
  - [[Upgrade from Linux|doc/upgrade/linux]]

Related documents
=================

- [[Design document of *Tails Cloner*|installation]]
- [[Design document of the download verification|download_verification]]
- [Archive of our design artifacts](https://gitlab.tails.boum.org/tails/ux/-/tree/master/installation%20assistant)
- [[!tails_ticket 18074 desc="Usability tests from December 2021"]]

Implementation tricks
=====================

The installation instructions are presenting very similar content in many
different scenarios with small variations: slightly different steps, slightly
different terminology, etc.

To reuse as much content as possible and reduce the quantity of text and
translations, our implementation relies heavily on 2 tricks. Both are
quite hackish but were the only solution we found to avoid duplicating
massive amount of content in ikiwiki.

### Ikiwiki inlines

The [inline directive](https://ikiwiki.info/ikiwiki/directive/inline/) of
ikiwiki allows embedding a file into another file to avoid duplicating content.
It is quite limited and brittle, especially when used together with the PO
plugin. See [[!tails_ticket 6907]].

### Conditional CSS content

To adapt a piece of content reused using ikiwiki inlines to the context
where it appears we are using CSS classes. For example, to introduce the
program used to install an intermediary Tails on Windows and Linux we
wrote:

<pre>
&lt;span class="windows"&gt;a program called Rufus.&lt;/span&gt;
&lt;span class="linux"&gt;a program called GNOME Disks.&lt;/span&gt;
</pre>

Elements with the `windows` class being only displayed in the Windows
scenario and elements with the
`linux` class being only displayed in the Linux scenario.

- Classes for elements displayed only on one scenario:
  - `windows` for [[/install/windows|/install/windows]]
  - `mac` for [[/install/mac|/install/mac]]
  - `linux` for [[/install/linux|/install/linux]]
  - `expert` for [[/install/expert|/install/expert]]
  - `dvd` for [[/install/dvd|/install/dvd]]
  - `download-only-img` for [[/install/download|/install/download]]
  - `download-only-iso` for [[/install/download|/install/download-iso]]
  - `pc-clone` for [[/install/clone|/install/clone/pc]]
  - `mac-clone` for [[/install/mac/clone|/install/clone/mac]]
  - `upgrade-clone` for [[/upgrade/clone|/doc/upgrade/clone]]
  - `upgrade-tails` for [[/upgrade/tails|/doc/upgrade/tails]]
  - `upgrade-windows` for [[/upgrade/win|/doc/upgrade/windows]]
  - `upgrade-mac` for [[/upgrade/mac|/doc/upgrade/mac]]
  - `upgrade-linux` for [[/upgrade/linux|/doc/upgrade/linux]]

- Classes for elements potentially displayed on different pages:
  - `clone` for content involving cloning:
     - `pc-clone`, `upgrade-clone`, `mac-clone`
  - `usb` for content with a USB stick as destination device (only for installation):
     - `windows`, `mac`, `linux`, `expert`
  - `upgrade` for content for manual upgrade:
     - `upgrade-clone`, `upgrade-tails`, `upgrade-os`
  - `upgrade-os` for content for manual upgrade from another OS
     - `upgrade-windows`, `upgrade-mac`, `upgrade-linux`

- Other classes:
  - `standalone` for content that should only be displayed outside of
    the installation instructions. For example on
    [[Starting Tails on PC|doc/first_steps/start/pc]].

<a id="overview"></a>

Overview
========

The *overview* is the first part of an installation scenario and summarizes graphically:

  - The requirements of the installation scenario in terms of hardware
    and time. This is important so that people get ready and make sure
    beforehand that they have everything needed to complete the
    scenario.
  - The different steps. This give a rough idea of what will happen
    next and how complex it is, with links to each step to ease navigation.

<a id="download"></a>

Download
========

The download of the ISO image is the 1st step of the most common installation scenarios.
It is also available as a [[standalone page|install/download]].

We only offer direct downloads over HTTPS.

We stopped providing BitTorrent downloads in 2026. See [[!tails_ticket 19275]].

See our [[design document on download
verification|download_verification]] for a security analysis of the
different verification techniques that we provide.

<a id="steps"></a>

Steps
=====

The detailed installation *steps* are given on the same page as the overview
and download.

- Everything is on a single page so that people can get a feeling of what is left
  to be done and don't get lost between download and installation for example. During the tests, many people were scrolling up and down
  the page, for example while waiting for an operation to complete or
  when feeling that they missed something earlier.

- The content of each step is written in an inline stored in
  `install/inc/steps/*.inline.mdwn` which is inlined from the scenarios
  themselves (for example `install/debian/usb.mdwn`) and adapted to each
  scenario using CSS classes.

<a id="rufus"></a>

*Rufus*
=======

For Windows, we instruct people to use
[*Rufus*](https://rufus.ie/) to copy the USB image onto
their USB stick. On top of this, we self-host the downloads of *Rufus*
on our own infrastructure. The
<https://gitlab.tails.boum.org/tails/etcher-binary> repository is added as an
[ikiwiki underlay](https://ikiwiki.info/plugins/underlay/) on our website.

We self-host a copy of *Rufus* because:

- It gives us more predictability on what users end up doing. This is useful in
  terms of Help Desk.

- It prevents 3rd parties from learning a bit more about who uses Tails.
  Pointing to the upstream website would provide upstream direct referrers
  about who is using *Rufus* to install Tails.

- It prevents the upstream website from serving rogue downloads (targeted or not). We might
  still get a rogue download ourselves but:

  * We download *Rufus* twice from different locations to
    prevent targeted attacks.

  * We download *Rufus* in a limited time window, which might save our users some supply
    chain issues. If our users were to download *Rufus* every time, a
    short-time supply chain attack would definitely affect some of them.

<div class="note">

<p>The same logic applies to <i>balenaEtcher</i>, which we still instruct for
macOS. ([[!tails_ticket 20855]])</p>

</div>
