[[!meta title="Reproducible builds"]]

[[!toc levels=2]]

# Verification during release process

How is something verified to be reproducible? It is a matter of
definition, which ideally requires that every conceivable compatible
system should get the same result. As you'll see below we'll lower
this requirement slightly for practical purposes. :)

## Assumptions

1. The Release Manager (RM) is not evil! ♥

2. RM's computer is trusted.

3. RMs don't plug their smartcard in a computer outside of the release
   process.

4. Our web site and the webserver that runs is is trusted (so much of
   other Tails stuff relies on this that we can't reasonably set the
   bar higher).

5. The attacker can push to tails.git but cannot force-push

6. The attacker has write access to rsync.lizard

7. An attacker publishing a compromised Tails needs to update the image description file,
   UDFs and/or detached signatures to our website, and possibly replace
   a Git tag. If this is done through Git, there's a much greater
   chance we notice it after of our release process than during it. (If
   this is done directly on the web server, chances are that we don't
   notice it and it could even survive Git push and web site refresh,
   but it's out of scope here as said above.)

## Goals

Here are our high-level goals and their rationales.

1. Identify reproducibility bugs (ideally before releasing)

   * We are claiming that we release reproducible products. We don't
     want to lie to the world.

   * We will hopefully involve third-parties in the reproducibility
     verification process at some point; they'll need confidence that
     our products are reliably reproducible, otherwise they might be
     discouraged and stop even trying.

   * A reproducibility bug can be a symptom of another bug.

2. Ensure what we've tested (QA) and reproduced matches what is
   published

Furthermore, let's make the process _not_ depend on a few key persons
in a tight, not well defined time frame (e.g. during release
process). Availability is a serious constraint, and if e.g. the
architects of the reproducibility efforts are the only ones able to
follow the process it is an indication that the process probably is
too complex, which makes it prone for errors.

## Design and implementation

We do two reproducibility checks:

* For Goal 1, we do a sanity check that is only about identifying
  non-malicious bugs as soon as possible.

  - [[ISO|contribute/release_process#reproducibility-sanity-check-iso]]
  - [[IUKs|contribute/release_process#reproducibility-sanity-check-iuk]]
    (not very useful at the moment since Jenkins doesn't build IUKs)

* For Goal 2, we consistently monitor that image description files and UDFs are legitimate:

  - via automatic montitoring ([[!tails_ticket 20825 desc="not implemented yet"]])
  - manually checking [[on a monthly basis|contribute/release_process/test]]
